'.-■v  \  »<-■ 


va\.^.7e> 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011 


http://www.archive.org/details/emigrantsguideto04hast 


Hastings  1BA5 
8  Copies  located 


Baneroft 
Bsneroft 

Cos 
Oraff 
Oodehaux 
Rontlngton 


Oregon  Hist. 
Soc. 

St rest er 


Binding 

Lacks  wrappers  and 
tlUe  page 

Bound  nith  other 
guides «  nithout 
nrappers. 

Original  printed 
wrappers. 

Original  printed 
wrappers. 

Full  ealf . 


Front  wrapper  onljr 
Rebound 


Original  printed 
boards. 


Height 

22.  cm.  or 
8-11A6  in. 

20.2  cm.  or 
7-15/16  in. 


22.3  em.  or 
8-3/4  in. 

21.5  offl.  or 
8-1/2  in. 

21.5  cm.  or 
8-1/2  in. 

21,3  cm.  or 
8-3/8  in. 

20.  cm.  or 
7-3/if  in. 

20.  CO.  or 
7-7/8  in. 


Width 

14*  oa.  or 

5-1/4  in. 

13.4  em.  or 
5-1/4  in. 


14.3  <UB.  or 
5-5/8  in. 

14.  cm.  or 
5-1/2  in. 

12.6  cm.  or 
5  in. 

14.  cm.  or 
5-1/2  in. 

13.  cm.  or 
5-1/4  inc. 

12.5  cm.  or 
i»-15/l6  inc. 


Condition 
Cut 

Cut 

Cut 

Lower  edges  vncut. 

Some  lower  edges 
uncut. 

Cut. 
Cut 
Cut 


May  31f  1949 


h-    !> 


(inci 


H**ff^Mw><MWMM«i 


Mn  sh  ^y<<^S.    «^^ji«.Ty  U^c'J   the  }J  ,    ,5-   /^" 

Ct\fLfi-hft^    04:,,.   //j(/4^f*r  //so,r. 


)L.,X 


C  r 


u;^  ^^' 


/fij/jc/'^ 


r 


7//  (/  . 


A'  -^"  ■■'  "  '/ 


■.'-■/    /     .^>      / 


V  /' 


'  /- 


r'U^      ^^"^        " 


y    /■•/  /  '    "  ' 


/;  .V  y-/;/^ 


/       y 


('^  V  / 


/  // 


,. '/;  - 


'*■■  *  ««  . 


THE 


ExMIG HANTS'    GUI.>jti 

OREG^)iM:  AND    CALIFORi^IA^ 

tilAPTEE  L 

AND  l^.:fl}ENT?^*^-A:  PARTY  0} 
EMIGEANTS. 

»T^icI2imJeznns;  convenlio).  ^trader.,,  :,^,n.,p,  . 
^  imcfi'n  of  tmg-miHi^;  vic..^,isc  of;   mmber  . 
hire  Jynn  Imir.pemhmr'i.   ^-^^  Hicipafrd/mm?' 
Proposition  to  ,iwcl  lawn;  f-''^onf,'lhcrr  t 
dian  ri^:k(s.     Olf'rndcr  ano..  i-^f].  /^ ;.-_.,  ,7 
jjori  0/     A  /Jecrte;  oppositi 
Return  to  ike  SU'>c^-     ^} 
bnjf'alo;  I'Lineri^iiyfj'     ■  i 
cess  of  m-owitainei'h.    ^' 
DitLian  of  party.  ',  1' 
posed  of.   'Parties-  -uiS/t-ii, 
afid  trappers.     Mr.  Fi 
I  Arrival  at  Su-rt-''  u-ah. 

J/',  order:  i-  ?/*'*» /^.' 7  •"  ( f 


Met 

J. 


''ah 


•O    f! 

.bv 


i.iil.       Kr 

^hio  to  < 


vip. 

iririii>=- 
1  SMTi^V 


-m. 


•an 


i:  aut 


ranonai  an  !  in.' 
complish  his  rjr  . 
dence,  Mo.,  which  |)la.;» 
traders,  and  the  Iiti   pofo 
■  )'iependetjce,  Iv 
n.iers,  andlhe  L 


nnui  tlie.r  iiuiKbei  ^lioui. 
sure  the  safety  of  al!,  v^: 
their  favorite  place  of,' 
ernigrunts  continued  to  i) 
ar  May,  our  cornpamr  r 
ns  a  force  of  eightv  avn 
tecti'jn.     I-Iavji.ijnr  oro;i:n 
thcmj^<-[?es  --Jtl-'  :h</'ne;. 


(vaS    1 1 


^  the  zh 


;0  JliC 


I.   Vi 

re:  sr 


THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

nrhedio  "be  essential,  and  indispensable,  and  all  t^gs  else  being  t 
-re.lm.l:-.s.onth.e  13jh„day_.of  Ma^^Jn,  tbe.xeai,l^f ,  f  f«  0"e  maa 
united  in  inlv^iest; nnited  in  feelm^;  we  were,  en  route,  lor  the  long-  deA. 
s'.ved  El  Dorh(y:)Hhe  West.  ..      . 

'^^^^■f'o^-ivas  Kigh  glee,  jocular  hilarity,  and  happy  anticipation,  as 
we  t^us  ^ai"^-^  forward  into  the  wild  expanse,  of  the  untrodden  regions  of 
the  '"we*^ern  world."     The  harmony  of  feeling,  the  t^ameness  of  purpose, 
and  the  'identity  of  interest,  w^hich  here  existed,  seemeJ  to  indicate  nothmJ 
Ir^  roiitP"^^'^  order,  hai'nnony  and  peace,  amid  all  thetrying  scenes  incV 
dent'to  oV^'  ^^no-  and  toilsome  journey.     But  \ye  had  proceeded  oi?ly  a 
C^^^.'^la-s^travciifrom  our  native  land  of  order  and  s'curity,  wheri,  th^ 
Anipfic; '^  clW.racter  "  was  fully  exhibited.     All  •  upfl'ared  to  be  deter- 
.. :,.„,(!  toi-^ovc-n,  but  not  to  be  governed.     H^re  v;e      -kp    without  law, 
V"' out  ofc  ^^^  md  without  restraint;  in  a  stnte  of  i)dlure,  anud  the  con- 
i'ised  revi'  ''^^i    fvai^uicnts  of  elementary  society !     r^ome  were  sad,  while 
|ne4  wle  L'^'n-y;  and  while  the  brave  doubted,  the- timid  ;trpibled! 
V"  ■':  -^S  confusion,  it  was  suggested  by  our  paptain,  that  we  "Call  a 
ni£chA)'u- tents,  for  the  purpose  of  en<^cting  a  code  of  laws^fof 
'  rv -MP    nr.  nf  ■  the  compm'y.      The  suggestion  was  proniiitry 
•    /ore  required  to  .up(>par  in  their  legislative  ccb- 
;-^ried,  it  was  urgied-'^^Y  ^be  captain,  as  a  reason 
;iiiacL  a  code  of  laws,  that f'"  individual  of  the  party, had 
,;ire  an  Indian  horse,  and  .^hut  he  had  made  arrangements 
is  siuiul  purpose,  by  proc;-i"g  a  rope,  and  setting  out 
In  view  of  this  alarminjT  staie  of  facts,  it  wa^  urged  by 
•■^  over-righteous,  thci  th'  ofleiiding^arty  should  be  im- 
\i  his  trial,  for  this- ^^^'fvmous  and  :Wanton  outrage  upon 
Nis  su<'''f^estion  w-'    ^^-O  Teadi.lv  tomplied  with,  and  tli-e 
Taigit?(l,  wh'^  ioterS^,ising  a  plea  to  the  juris- 

■lAl'U-'  .^ti'\e  "general  issue."     T]i6 

i>f,  several  speeches  were  d-e- 
^  dCi^^'iciations  of  such  highly^ 
i^sc^er  at  the  bar  of  imaginary 
foil'-:  he  part  of  the  accused,  that 
,  viewed,  by  the  advocates  of  '-ex- 
,t  all ;  that  to  talk  of  taking  an  In- 
fw:  malum  ])rohibiium.     It  was  not 
jthing,  as  he  had  do7ie  nothing.     It 
.,'  for  in  our  infant  state  of  society,  we 
iy  consisted  of  the  wdiole  company,  who 
4  almost  unanimously,  rendered  their 
iccused  was  discharged,  and  permitted 
terminated  t%^  first  jury  trial,  in  our 
It  was  e^*       ely  simple,  yet   purely 
minati»  ^t  did,  afforded  no  valid  ^ 

-   vff  \]that  view,  and  many  •■ 

*  for  which  they  assem-  * 

di-d  to  the  discharge  of 
•n.     A  committee  was, 
J  future  government  of' 
/nost  sai.guine  expecta 
^  its  opinion,  no  code 


?' 

1 


I 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA. 


kws  was  requisite,  other  than  the  moral  code,  enacted  by  the  '  •  ■" 

the  universe,  and  which  is  found  recorded  in  the  breast  of  ; 
Tiiis  report  was  adopted  by  an  overwhelming  ma,jority,  thf 
of  which  was,  that  no  code  of  human  laws  was  enacted; 
peared  to  be  a  strong  determination  ori  the  part  of  some,  to  t.. 
in  the  v/ay  of  legislating-.     In  accordance  with  this  determinatio.. 
cree  was  passed,  which  required  the  immediate  and  the  indiscriminai^. 
termination  of  the  whole  canine  race,  old  and  young,  male  and   female, 
wherever  they  might  be  found,  within  our  jurisdiction.     This  decree  was 
passed  by  a  very  smalt  majority,  and  it  gave  great  dissatisfaction,  espe- 
cially to  the  owners  of  the  animals  whose  extermination  it  contemplated. 
Those  wiio  ilivored  its  enforcement,  insisted  that  the  subjects  of  "the  de- 
cree of  death,"  however  athletic  they  might  be,  could  not  possibly  be 
taken  through;  that  they  would  die  before  they  had  traveled  half  the  dis- 
tance: and  that,  by  their  incessant  barking  and  howling,  they_ would  no- 
tify the  Indians  of  our  locality  when  encamped.     On  the  oiher  baud,,'  it 
was  insisted  that,  if  they  died  on  the  way,  that  would  be  the  loss  of^he 
owners,  and,  consequently,  their  business;  and  that  if  they  did  n^'if'/ttt 
Indians  of  our  position,  they  would*also  notify  us  of  theirs;  an''       .   ■ 
the  conclusion  was  drawn,  that  the  advantages  more  than  count 
tlie  dit-advantages.     Notwithstanding  this  conclusion,  several 
slain  under  the  inconsiderate  decree,  when  the  opposition  b< 
general  and  determined.     The  owners  of  the  most  VLtluabl- 
declared  in  the  most  positive  terms,  that  "if  any  man   s). 
dogs,  they  would  kill  him,  regardless  of  all  consequenc 
killers,"  however,  now  went  out  "armed  and  equipped" 
quired,  with  a  full  determination  to  discharge  their /6o?i;      ; 
(51/^9  duty;   but  they  were  promptly  met  by  the  owners  ''^'■•■ 
"armed  and  equipped,"  and  prepared  for  any  emerg 
povtant  crisis,  the  captain  thought  proper  to  convene  ^  •,     \    '■ 

in  its  legislative  capacity,  which  being  done,  the  "d  .;,'  dt^jree,';  as  it  ^yo.s 
called,  was  almost  unanimously  abrogated.     This     /"  '*- 
effort  at  legislation.     This  legislative  rebuff,  ho  > 
difficulty  which  we  here  encountered. 

Our  misfortunes  were  heightenet,  |r  fliseti^e  arid  de 
and  child  of  a  Mr.  Lancaster  were  lai.^n  v  ,,y;'  ilL 
died.  Mrs.  Lancaster  remained  very  low  u  c-^yQveTiii  daje,,  during  which 
time,  the  company  remained  in  camp  ;  btjv  a.-4iiere  \va^TMfi'^<5  prospects  of 
her  immediate  recovery,  and  as  ar.y  co  aside  able  <Jef ay  in  this  section, 
might  be  attended  with  fatal  consequer.ces  to'he  v'-Jiole  company,  Mr. 
Lancaster  determined  to  return  to  the  States,  vi.\ich. iie  could  very  safely 
do,  as  we  were  but  a  few  days  travel  from  tb;  ,Mr\ssouri  line,  and  as  we 
had  passed  no  hostile  Indians.'  Upon  arrivii"^.,  &,',;,is  determination,  we 
continued  our  journey,  and  Mr.  Lancaster  rt,iettjd  to  the  States,  where 
he  safely  arrived,  as  I  have  since  learned.  \i  e  passed  on  now  very 
agreeably,  with  the  exception  of  the  occasi'.nal  expression  of  dissatislae- 
tion  with  our  officers,  which,  however  well  yumled,  grated  harshly  upon 
the  ears  of  the  order-observing,  and  law-a>j|inf*  portion  (4'  the  company. 
In  a  very  few  days,  we  met  a  company  a-^iit^Mclers  from  Fort  Larimie,  on 
their  way  to  the  States,  with  their  relurns,^.:^  ■' rs  and  buli'aio  robes,  which 
they  had  accumulated  during  the  previous  >rrv  r.  These  furs  and  robes 
were  transported  in  wagons,  drawn  by  o  Here  many  of  om-  party 


d   lasn 


The  vv'if. 
child  soon 


S  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

for  the  first  time,  saw  the  buffalo.     The  only  ones,  however,  which  ihey 
saw  here,  were  eight  or  ten  buffalo  calves,  which  the  traders  had  domes- 
ticated for  Lhe  St.  Louis  market;  and  so  completely  domesticated  were 
they,  that  they  followed   the   cows,  which  had  been   taken   out  for  that 
purpose,  with  very  little  trouble  to  the  drivers.     This  meeting  afforded  a 
very  favorable  opportunity  for  forwarding  letters  to  the  States,  of  which 
many  of  the  party  were  happy  to  avail  themselves.     We  were  informed, 
by  this  party,  that  we  would  find  the  buffalo  upon  the  Platte,  a  few  days 
travel  below  the  confluence  of  its  north  and  south  branches :  upon  arri- 
ving at  which  place,  we  did  find  them  in  the  greatest  abundance  imagina- 
ble.    No  adequate    conception   can  be   formed  of  the  immensity  ot'  :he 
numerous  herds,  which  here  abound.     The  entire  plains  and  prairies  are 
densely  covered,  and  completely  blackened  with  them,  as  far  as   the  most 
acute   vision  extends.     Now  the  most  feverish  anxiety,  and  confused  ex~ 
citri>nent   prevails.     Those  who   are    accustomed  to  buffalo  hunting,  are 
almost  instantly  upon  their  fleet  horses,  and   in  chase,  while  those  una^ 
custfkmed  to  such  scenes,  "green  horns,"  as  they  are  called,  are  in   the 
greiteVt  confusion,  adjusting  saddles  and  martingals,  tightening  girths  ami 
spi;rs,  ^,!ading  guns  and  pistols,  and  givfng  their  friends,  wives    and  chil- 
dr^'u,    a|I    manner   of   assurances  of  their   unparalleled  success.     They 
i  ">w  ready,  and    like    the   mountaineer,  they  dart  away,  as  with 
'•^  light ;  but  they  soon  observe  tliat  they  are  far  in  the  rear  of 
•'?er,  who  is  now  amid   the  bufl!alo,  slaying  them  on  the  right 
"ront  and   rear.     But  stimulated   by  the  loud  thundering 
oimds,  produced  by  the  confused   rushir%Lforth   of   (he 
(htened  buflalo,  as  well  as   by  the   extraoiJimi]-y  success 
"  ^er,  diey  ply  the  spur  with  renewed  energy;  and  giving 
"s-Hpose  rein,  they  are  soon   in  the  vicinity  o(  the  scene 
*^        ^  i..Mi,  ^    .     v3i   iji  the   scene    of    action,'  for  to  their    utter   sur- 
pif    ,  and  'iitcleiJkie  vexation,  their  heretofore  faithful   steeds,  now  de- 
cline the  cnte.st;  a' I   noiwithstanding  tlie   renewed  application    of  the 
spar,  they  iferel/  h>     j.  snort  and  phmge,  but  keep  a  respectful  distance, 
aniil  they  arrive  in  thf-^.^idst  of  the  slain  buflalo,  which  have  been  left  by 
tiie    mountaijiieer.     Hei'>    their  lii>idity  is  increased,  and  taking  a  new 
fright,  they  dart  and  lea]  away  \^.i^i  great  velocity,  and  notwithstanding 
the  firm  and  steady  res  raint  oftb     sturdy  rider,  they  soon   meet  the 
moving  caravan,  to  tlio  li>finite  (rati;v,r.tion  of  the  mountaineer,  the  utt^r 
astonishment  of  the  "  grci.^r/iVnn,"  and  the  sad  disappointment   of  the 
frieiids,  wives  and  (thih'rei:  who  had  anticipated  so  much  from   the  first 
grand  debut  in  buffalp  ]'  fifing.     The  experienced  hunter  is  soon  seen  re- 
turning to  the  camp,  with  us  ]iorse  heavily  laden  with  the  choicest  portions 
of  some  of  the  luimero^ulmfialo  which  he  has  slain.     In  order  that  the 
cx)mpany   may  now  obtaif   a  supply  of  the  delicious   fresh    meat,  with 
which    the    plains  are  strwed,  it  is  directed  to  encamp,  which   having 
been  done,  all  are  soon  ahuxlandy  supplied.     Having  been  a  few  days 
among  the  buffalo,  and  their  horses  having  become  accustomed  to  diese 
terrific  scenes,  even   the  "gren   horn,"  is  enabled,     :t  only  to  kill  the 
buflalo  with  much  expenness  but  he  is  also  frequend;    ^een,  driving  them 
to  the   encampment,  with  as''    uch   indifference  as  he  used  formerly  to 
drive  his  domestic  <;attle  aboutfhis  own  fields,  in  the  land  of  his  nativity. 
Giving  the  buflalo  lapid  chase  br  a  few  minutes,  they  become  so  fatigued 
and  cou/pletely  exh  'isted,  tliat  they  are  driven  from  place  to  place,  Miith 


lii^S^lMiiiiMi* 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  9  ,\ 

as  little  difficulty  as  our  common  cattle.     Both  the  grown  buffalo  and  the 

calves,  are  very  frequently  driven  in  this    manner  to    the   encampment,  [ 

where  they  are  readily  slaughtered.  i 

By  this  time,  the  party  had  become  greatly  incensed  with  th*^  officers, 
and  had  determined  upon  holding  an  election,  for  the  purpose  of  electing 
other  officers.  Accordingly  an  election  was  held,  wliich  resulted  in  the 
election  of  myself  to  the  first,  and  a  Mr.  Lovejoy  to  the  second  office  of 
our  infant  republic.  This  election  gave  some  dissatisfaction,  to  a  few  of 
the  party,  especially  the  disaffi^cted  and  disappointed  office-holders  and 
office-seekers,  who  now,  together  with  a  few  others,  separated  themselves 
from  the  main  body,  and  went  on  a  few  days  in  advance,  to  Fort  Larl- 
mie,  where  they  had  been  but  a  few  days,  when  the  main  body  arrived. 
Upon  arriving  at  Forts  Larimie  and  John,  we  were  received  in  a  very 
kind  and, friendly  manner  by  the  gentlemen  of  those  forts,  who  extended 
every  attention  to  us,  while  we  remained  in  their  vicinity.  While  here 
several  of  our  party  disposed  of  their  oxen  and  wagons,  taking  horses  in 
exchange.  This  ihcy  were  induced  to  do,  under  the  impression  that  their 
wagons  could  not  be  taken  to  Oregon,  of  which  they  were  assured  by  the 
gentlemen  of  those  forts,  and  other  mountaineers.  Many  others  of  the 
party,disposed  of  their  cows  and  other  cattle,  which  had  beconivi  tender 
footed,  as  from  this  cause,  it  was  supposed,  that  they  would  soon-  i.  iiiithle 
to  travel;  but  we  found  by  experience,  that  by  continued  dr'  g,  their 
hoofs  became  more  and  more  hardened,  until  they  liad  entirel)  itcoveitd. 
Before  leaving  these  forts,  the  disaffected  of  our  party,  proposed  to  unife 
^eir  destinies  again  with  ours;  but  the  main  body  being  so  exasperited 
with  their  former  course,  for  some  time  refused  their  conscit,  yet  in  vu3w 
of  the  fact,  that  they  must  either  travel  with  us,  remain  at  there  -fort  •,  or 
return  to  the  States,  they  were  permitted  to  join  us  again,  when,  we  were 
once  more,  enabled  to  continue  our  toilsome,  yet  interesting  journey. 

Leaving  these  forts,  we  had  traveled  but  a  few  miles,  when  we  met  a 
company  of  trappers  and  traders,  from  Fort  HalL  on  their'  way  to  the 
States,  among  whom  was  a  Mr.  Fitspateric,  who  j^Mned  ouf  party,  as  a 
guide,  and  traveled  with  us,  as  such,  to  Green  river.  From 'this  gende- 
man's  long  residence  in  the  great  western  prairies,  and  the  I^ocky  moun- 
tains, he  is  eminently  qualified  as  a  guide,  of  which  fact,  we  were  fully 
convinced,  from  the  many  advantages  which  we  derived  from  his  valuable 
services.     He  was  employed  by  Dr.  White,  who  had  received  the  appoint-  /^ 

ment  ^  Indian  agent  of  Oregon,  and  who  wa;  under  the  impression,  that 
our  government  would  defray  all  such  expenses  ;  which  impression,  how- 
ever, I  think,  was  entirely  unfounded.  Perfect  unanimity  of  feeling  and 
purpose,  now  having  been  fully  restored,  we  passed  on  very  agreeably, 
and  with  little  or  no  interruption,  until  we  arrived  at  Sweet-water,  near 
Independence  rock.  Here  we  had  the  misfortune  to  lose  a  young  man, 
by  the  name  of  Bailey,  who  was  killed  by  the  accidental  discharge  of  a 
gun.  As  the  ball  entered  at  the  groins,  and  passed  entirely  through  the 
body,  it  was  readily  seen,  that  the  wound  must  prove  fatal.  He  survived 
but  about  two  hours,  which,  to  him,  were  hours  of  excruciating  suffering, 
and  tojis,  those  of  gloomy  despondency  and  grief.  He  was  an  amiable 
young  man,  a  native  of  the  state  of  Massachusetts;  latterly  from  the  ter- 
ritory of  Iowa.  Being  a  blacksmith  by  trade,  the  party  sustained  a  great 
loss  in  his  death ;  not  only,  however,  in  reference  to  his  services  as  a  m.e- 
2 


10  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

chanic,  but   also,  in  reference   to  the  important  protection,  which  each 
afforded  to  the  other,  in  this  wild  region  of  savage  ferocity.     While  he 
survived,  every  possible  exertion  was  made  to  afford  him  relief,  but  all  to 
no  purposj.     He  constantly  insisted  that  it  was  utterly  impossible  for 
him  to  recover,  that  immediate  death  was  inevitable.     The  physician  now 
gave  up  all  hopes  of  his  recovery;  his  voice  faltered  ;  death  was  depicted 
upon  his  countenance :  and  every  thing  seemed  to  indicate  a  speedy  re- 
turn of  his  immortal  spirit,  "  to  God  who  gave  it,"  yet,  even  now,  he  was 
to  be  heard,  urging  us  all,  in  the  most  emphatic  language,  to  be  more  cau- 
tious in  the  future,  and,  thereby,  avoid  similar  accidents.     He  now  took  his 
"  eternal  leave  "  of  all,  in  the  most  solemn  and  affecting  manner,  at  the 
same  time, most  earnestly  admonishing  us,  "  to  prepare  for  a   like  fate, 
should  it  be  our  unhappy  lot,  and,  at  all  events,  to  make  a  speedy  prepa- 
tion  for  death  and  eternity!  "     This  was  truly  a  most  solemn  and  awful 
scene  ;  and  these  admonitions,  coming  from  such  a  source,  and  under 
such  circumstances,  must  have  produced  an  impressive  and  lasting  effect! 
He  expired  in  the  evening,  and  the  burial  took  place  the  next  morning. 
The  grave  having  been  prepared,  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain  of  considerar 
ble  altitude,  about  eighty  rods    southwest,  from  the  usual  encampment, 
we  now  followed  to  the  grave,  the  second  corpse  of  our  little  company  ! 
As  we  thus  marched  along,  in  solemn  procession,  the  deepest  gloom  and 
solemnity,  was  depicted  upon  every  countenance,  and  pungent  and  heart- 
felt grief  pervaded  every  breast !     While  we  were  silently  and  solemnly 
moving  on,  under  arms, "  to  the  place  of  the  dead,"  the  sentinels  were  to  be 
seen,  standing  at  their  designated  posts,  alternately  meditating  upon  the 
solemnity  of  the  passing  scene,  and  casting  their  eyes  watchfully  around  as 
if  to  descry  the  numerous  and  hostile  foe,  with  whom'we  were  everywhere 
surrounded,  and  thus,  to  avert  accumulating  danger!     At  the  same  time, 
the  young  man,  who  was  the  unwilling  instrument  of  this,  our  trying  ca- 
lamity, was  also  to  be  seen,  walking  to  and  fro,  suffering  the  most  ex- 
treme mental  agony;  apparently  noticing  nothing  that  was    transpiring 
around ;   seemingly  Imconscious  of  every  thing,  but   his   own  unhappy 
existence,  and  the  sad  departure  of  his,  and  our  lamented  friend  !     The 
ordinary  rites,  after  interment,  having  been  performed  at  the  grave,  the 
company  returned  in  the  same  solemn  manner,  to  the  encampment,  where 
all  sat  down  in  silent   mournful  mood,  contemplating  the  many  trying 
scenes  of  the  desolating  past,  and  anticipating  the  dieaded  fearful  future  ! 
Having  spent  several  days  at  this  place,  and  having,  in  the  mean  time, 
procured  an  additional  supply  of  meat,  re-elected  our  officers,  and  made 
ail  other  necessary  prepiiratory  arrangements,  we,  once  more,  set  out  up- 
on our  dismal  journey;^  when  Ithought  proper  to  issue  an  order,  which 
required  all,  in  the  future,  to  carry  their  guns  uncapped  or  primed.     The 
propriety  and  importance  of  this  order,  were  clearly  manifested,  by  the 
sad  occurrence  just  related,  hence  it  was  readily  and  promptly  obeyed. 
Had  such  an  order  been  previously  issued  and  enforced,  our  deceased 
friend  might  still  have  lived,  and  instead  of  sadness  and  dismay,  hilarity 
and  joy  might  have  pervaded  our  community;  but   we,  unfortunately, 
like  thousands  of  others,  were  mere  sophomores  in  the  great  school  of 
experience.     The  f  ites,  taking  advantage  of  our  want  of  experience,  ap- 
peared really  to  have   conspired  against  us ;  surrounding  us  everywhere^, 
with  the  most  inauspicious  circumstances ;  and  crowding  our  lonely  way 
with  innumerable  and  unforseen  dangers,  and  with  death,  as  if  determined 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  ll 

to  deluge  the  whole  western  wilds,  with  human  misery,  and  to  engulf  us, 
their  defenceless  victims,  in  the  deep,  dark  abyss  of  inextricable  wo  ;  and 
thus,  to  feast  upon  our  misfortunes,  and  exult  triumphantly  over  our 
weakness  and  inexperience !  Sweet-water,  was  a  bitter  water  to  us  ;  if 
it  even  possessed  any  sweetness,  it  had  lost  it  all  now,  for  it  afforded  us 
nothing  but  the  extreme  bitterness  of  sore  affliction  and  deep  distress. 


\ 


CHAPTER  II. 

SCENES  AND  INCIDENTS  OF  A  PARTY  OF  OREGON 
EMIGRANTS. 

Departure  from  Sweet-uater.  Independence  rock;  examination  of;  inscrip- 
tion of  names  upon.  Descmed  by  Indians;  hostile  attitude  of;  taken  pris- 
oner by.  Determination  to  escape.  Change  of  purpose.  Rude  treat- 
ment. Attempt  to  take  life.  Great  differences  among  the  Indians.  Par- 
tial reconciliation.  A  victim  slain.  A  terrific  scene.  Arrival  of  elderly 
men.  Orders  to  march.  Fortunate  occurrence.  A  co7isidtation;  result  of. 
Indian  politeness.  Discovery  by  spies.  Indications  of  hostilities.  Discov- 
ery of  our  party;  contemplated  attack  upon;  excitement  in.  Demands 
upon  the  chief.  Reconciliation.  Sm^dng  the ''■pipe  of  peace."  "Making 
meat.'''  An  accident.  Hunters  iSK^.  Hostile  movements.  Guarding 
against.  Increased  numbers  of  ^^/jg^is;  their  flags.  Battle  array.  A 
^' smoke''"' and '' talk.''''  Fmendship  restored.  Atrial;  its  result.  Arrival 
at  Green  river.  Leaving  of  wagons.  Division  of  party.  Prophetic  specula- 
tions.    Solemnity  of  parting.     Arrival  at  Fort  Hall.     A  meeting  called. 

.  Determination  to  leave  wagons.  Preparation  to  leave  Fort  Hall.  Antici- 
pated difficulties.  Arrival  at  Fort  Boisia.  A  death.  Airival  at  Dr. 
Whitmayi's  mission.  Divine  service.  An  India?!  sermon.  Character  of 
the  doctor.  Passing  Fort  Wallawalla  The  meihodist  mission  at  the 
dalles.  Arrival  at  the  lower  settlements  in  Oregon.  Refections  upon  the 
'past,  present  and  future.  Dissatisfaction.  Kindness  of  Dr.  McLoughlin. 
Determination  to  leave  the  country. 

The  company  having  left  our  unfortunate  encampment,  on  Sweet-wa- 
ter, early  in  the  morning,  soon  passed  Independence  rock,  which  will  be 
described,  in  the  description  of  the  routes.  A  Mr.  Lovejoy  and  myself 
stopped  at  this  rock,  with  a  view  of  spending  a  few  hours,  in  examining 
its  peculiar  structure,  as  well  as  to  observe  the  various  names,  there  to  be 
seen,  of  individuals  who  have  passed  that  way  ;  and  at  the  same  time,  to 
inscribe  our  own  names,  with  the  number  of  our  company,  the  date  of 
our  passing  ;  and  whatever  else  might  occur  to  us,  as  being  serviceable  to 
tliose  who  might  subsequently  pass  that  way.  Having  provided  ourselves 
with  materials  for  lettering,  we  tied  our  horses  at  the  foot  of  this  extraor- 
dinary rock,  where  we  also  left  our  guns,  and  commenced  our  toilsome 
assent  up  the  rocky  declivity.  The  company  had,  in  the  mean  time, 
gone  on,  supposing  that  we  would  find  no^  difficulty  in  overtaking  them, 
whenever  we  had  accomplished  our  purpose. 

We  had  scarcely  completed  our  labors,  when  we  were  surprised  by 
the  sudden  appearance  of  seven  Indians,  who  had  descried  us  from  some 


12  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

remote  hill  or  mountain.     They  presented  themselves  to  us,  in  the  most 

hostile  attitude,  rushing  towards  us  with  the  greatest  vehemence ;  uttering 
the  most  terrific  and  demoniac  yells  ;  and  with  the  most  frightful  gestures, 
seeming  to  design  nothing  but  our  immediate  destruction.  With  drawn 
bows  and  guns,  they  thus  rapidly  advanced,  while  we  were  cautiously, 
yet  hastily  descending  the  rocky  heights;  winding  our  way  with  all  pos- 
sible haste,  to  the  point  at  which  we  had  left  our  guns  and  horses,  at  which 
place,  ourselves  and  the  Indians  arrived  at  the  same  time,  when  we  im- 
mediately seized  our  guns,  with  a  view  of  defending  ourselves.  But  upon 
seeing  us  take  our  guns,  they  at  once  lowered  their  bows  and  guns,  and 
extended  their  hands  in  friendship.  We  hastily  took  their  hands,  but  as 
hastily  proceeded  to  mount,  and  to  prepare  for  our  departure.  We  had 
scarcely  mounted,  when  they  evinced  a  determination  to  prevent  our  leav- 
ing. One  of  them  held  Mr.  Lovejoy's  mule  by  the  bit,  while  others  laid 
hold  of  his  person ;  and  others  still,  stood  around  with  drawn  guns  and 
bows.  As  we  were  now  consulting  in  reference  to  the  proper  course  to 
be  pursued,  under  these  peculiar  and  critical  circumstances,  their  repeated 
demands  to  dismount,  and  their  increasing  determination  and  violence, 
forcibly  reminded  us  of  the  eminent  importance  of  immediate  and  decisive 
action.  Finally,  we  determined  to  effect  our  escape,  after  having  slain  as 
many  of  our  assailants  as  we  could,  which,  perhaps,  might  have  been  five 
of  the  seven,  as  we,  together,  had  that  number  of  shots,  upon  which  we 
might  rely.  Just,  however,  as  we  had  arrived  at  the  above  determination, 
to  our  astonishment,  we  beheld  the  w^hole  country,  as  far  as  we  could  see, 
completely  covered  with  them,  ra«jd^  dvancing  towards  us,  with  deafen- 
ing whoops  and  terrific  yells.  l^MB^eemed  to  have  sprung  up  from  bo- 
hind  every  rock,  to  have  come  do\^Ki'om  every  hill,  and  mountain ;  and 
to  have  emerged  from  every  valley  and  ravine.  Our  purpose  was  now,  of 
course,  changed,  for  resistance  was  out  of  the  question;  to  attempt  an 
escape  by  flight,  was  dangerous  in  the  extreme,  and  to  accomplish  it  was 
utterly  impossible  ;  we,  therefore,  dismounted,  and  determined  to  reconcile 
our  minds  to  our  fate,  be  that  \ik  or  death.  Every  thing  around  us,  ap^ 
peared  now,  to  indicate  nothing  but  immediate  torture,  and  ultimate  death, 
to  be  inflicted  by  merciless  savages.  Their  numbers  had,  by  this  time, 
increased  to  about  two  or  three  hundred ;  and  they  were  still  arriving  in 
great  numbers. 

We  were  treated  with  the  utmost  rudeness ;  our  guns  and  pistols  were 
taken  from  us;  Avhen  we  were  compelled  to  sit  upon  the  ground,  sur- 
rounded by  a  numerous  guard,  who  performed  its  whole  duty,  not  per- 
mitting us  to  change  our  positions  in  any  manner,  either  to  avoid  danger, 
or  to  acquire  comfort.  From  the  time  we  were  taken,  every  additional 
party  that  arrived,  invariably  offered  some  indignity  to  our  persons,  either 
by  striking  or  attempting  to  strike  us,  with  their  bows,  arrows,  or  the  ram- 
mers of  their  guns.  The  chief,  however,  protected  me  from  this  insult, 
for  which  purpose,  he  constantly  stood  or  sat  by  me ;  yet  he  appeared  un- 
able, or  unwilling  to  protect  my  companion,  who  was  repeatedly  stricken 
with  much  violence.  An  attempt  was  made  even  to  take  his  life,  which 
fortunately  failed.  This  murderous  attempt,  was  made  by  an  Indian  who 
had  just  arrived,  on  horseback,  and  who  appeared  to  be  much  more  infur 
riated  than  his  predecessors  in  barbarity.  Immediately  upon  his  arrival, 
he  rushed  most  furiously  upon  Mr.  Lovejoy,  suddenly  pressing  his  gun 
against  his  breast,  and  snapping  it,  but  as  it  missed  fire,  he  was  foiled  in 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  13 

his  fiendlike  purpose.  At  this  critical  crisis,  a  number  of  Indians  gather- 
ed around  Mr.  Lovejoy,  evidently  with  a  view  of  protecting  him.  from  fur- 
ther insult  and  danger,  when  unparalleled  consternation  and  confusion 
prevailed.  While  many  were  most  vehemently  insisting  upon  our  imme- 
diate destruction,  others  made  the  very  welkin  ring  with  their  boisterous 
and  clamorous  declamations  in  our  behalf,  and  no  doubt  Mr.  Lovejoy  and 
myself,  owed  our  preservation  entirely  to  their  persuasive  barbarous  elo- 
quence. The  influence  of  our  eloquent  defenders  was  so  great,  as  to  in- 
duce the  chief  to  order  six  of  his  men  to  fire  upon  him,  who  had  thu? 
rudely  assailed  my  companion.  They  promptly  obeyed  the  command, 
and  had  the  offender  not  been  making  his  escape  with  much  rapidity,  he 
would  undoubtedly  have  been  slain.  Having  galloped  ofll' about  two  hun- 
dred yards,  he  commenced  a  most  doleful  lamentation,  and  becoming  more 
and  more  enraged,  he  set  up  a  tremendous  howling  and  crying,  at  the 
same  time,  discharging  his  gun  in  the  open  air ;  thus  indicating,  in  terms 
not  to  be  misunderstood,  his  determined  and  settled  purpose  of  barbarous 
revenge.  But  opposition  soon  become  so  general,  that  he  was  convinced, 
that  returning,  with  hostile  purpose,  would  be  attended  with  imminent 
danger.  After  some  solicitation  on  the  part  of  his  friends,  he  was  per- 
mitted to  return,  upon  the  condition,  of  his  abandoning  his  hostile  pur- 
pose, and  conducting  himself  with  proper  Indian  decorum.  Having  re- 
turned, he  kept  a  respectful  distance  from  the  principal  scene  of  action, 
and  either  standing  or  sitting,  in  most  sullen  mood,  he  appeared  to  take  no 
part  or  interest  in  the  subsequent  transactions.  Some  new  source  of  dis- 
cord appeared  now,  to  have  arisen,  which  gave  rise  to  a  most  serious  and 
animated  discussion  ;  and  judg  ^  from  their  wild  and  angry  tones  and 
gestures,  their  boisterous  and  fie  .^.  «^leclamation;  some  were  again  in- 
sisting upon  our  decapitation,  or  u  ^-tiction  in  some  other  manner,  while 
others  were  again  insisting  upon  our  preservation.  The  discussion  con- 
tinued to  become  more  and  more  animated  ;  the  dissatisfaction  became 
greater;  the  breach  became  wider;  some  great  difference  evidently  ex- 
isted, which,  to  us,  appeared  beyond  a  possibility  of  reconciliation  ;  the  two 
contending  parties  stood  forth  against  each  other,  in  formidable  array,  as- 
suming the  most  uncompromising  and  hostile  attitude.  The  noisy,  wild 
discussion  now  ceased  to  some  extent,  and  both  parties  were  intensely  en- 
gaged in  loading  and  putting  their  guns  in  order  for  action.  At  this  crit- 
ical time,  for  what  purpose  we  knew  not,  twelve  of  them  advanced  thirty 
or  forty  yards  from  the  main  body,  towards  Independence  rock,  where 
they  stood  for  a  few  moments,  when  all  at  once,  and  without  any  order, 
they  discharged  their  pieces  in  the  direction  of  a  small  rock,  which  was 
between  them  and  Independence  rock.  We  soon  discovered  that  the  vic- 
tim of  their  wrath,  was  a  dog  which  had  followed  us,  without  our  know- 
ledge, upon  this,  our  unfortunate  excursion.  Upon  firing  at  the  dog,  a 
most  frightful  scene  ensued;  one  universal  burst  of  indignation  or  exulta- 
tion, we  knew  not  which,  resounded  through  the  air  with  most  terrific 
and  fiendish  roar ;  when  all  but  the  few  who  stood  around  us,  as  we  sat 
upon  the  ground,  rushed  in  quick  succession,  in  single  file,  towards  their 
slain  victim,  each  as  he  passed  which,  either  thrust  his  spear  or  lance  into 
the  dead  carcase,  struck  it  with  his  arrow,  the  rammer  of  his  gun,  or  kicked 
it ;  the  thrust,  blow  or  kick,  being  in  every  instance,  attended  with  a  most 
demoniac  sbriek.  They  continued  to  repeat  this  frightful  scene,  for  fifteen 
or  twenty  minutes,  setting  out  from  a  point  near  us,  they  formed  a  vafit 


14  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

circuit  around  their  victim,  returning-  to  the  same  point,  when  they  ar* 
rived  at  which,  they  invariably  uttered  the  most  indescribable  whoops  and 
yells,  which  could  emanate  only  from  the  wild  confusion  and  raging  mad- 
ness of  aboriginal  barbarism. 

Some  degree  of  quietude  was  again  restored,  but,  in  the  mean  time,  my 
horse  and  Mr.  Lovejoy's  mule  had  been  stripped  of  their  saddles,  bridles 
and  martingals  ;  all  the  rings  and  straps  had  been  cut  from  them ;  my 
holster  had  been  cut  and  spoiled  ;  and  our  arms  were  scattered,  we  knew 
not  where,  nor  was  it  very  material  where,  for  we  had  very  little  use  for 
a/rms^  and  about  as  little  for  legs,  as  we  were  not  permitted  to  stand  or 
walk.  Many  were  again,  becoming  more  boisterous,  when,  fortunate  for 
us,  a  number  of  elderly  men,  who  were  evidently,  men  of  high  distinction, 
just  arrived,  for  whom,  it  appeared  that  the  party  had  been  thus  long  wait- 
ing. It  was  now,  late  in  the  afternoon,  and  we  were  taken  early  in  the 
morning ;  although  the  time  of  our  detention,  thus  far,  was  short,  it  'ap- 
peared long  to  us  ;  hours  were,  to  us,  as  days  ;  the  sun  seemed  reluctant 
to  go  down  upon  the  wrath  of  our  infuriated  tormentors.  A  very  elderly 
man,  who  was  one  of  those  that  had  just  arrived,  and  who  appeared  to  be 
the  chief,  in  highest  authority,  after  some  general  remarks,  gave  orders 
to  march,  to  obey  which,  all  were  soon  busily  engaged  in  making  their 
arrangements.  Horses  were  provided  for  us,  but  not  our  own  ;  and  soon, 
many  of  the  party  were  on  their  march,  but  in  the  opposite  direction  from 
our  company.  The  old  chief,  just  referred  to,  happened,  at  this  time,  to 
pass  near  me,  when  I  extended  my  hand  to  him,  and  accosted  him  in  the 
ordinary  manner,  "  How  do  you  do  ?  "  He  readily  accepted  my  hand, 
and  replied  in  the  Indian  language.  r7,'iere  was  a  very  small  eccentric 
looking  man,  with  the  chief,  whoni  \  supposed  to  be  a  Canadian  half- 
breed.  I  also  offered  him  my  han%  with  the  same  salutation,  to  which 
he  replied,  in  the  English  language,  "  How  do  you  do?"  To  my  in- 
quiry whether  he  could  speak  the  English  language,  he  replied  "  yes." 
I  then  asked  him  if  he  would  request  the  chief,  and  all  those  men  to  stop, 
and  tell  them  that  I  wished  to  talk  with  them,  before  they  went  farther. 
He  again  replied  "  yes,"  and  briefly  addressed  the  chief,  who  commenced 
a  loud  harangue,  to  his  men,  and  soon,  those  who  had  commenced  their 
march  returned,  when  all  dismounted;  and  sitting  upon  the  ground,  side 
by  side,  formed  a  vast  circle.  The  chief  indicated  by  signs,  that  I  and 
my  companion,  should  sit  near  him,  which  w^e  did,  when  I  informed 
them  that  we  were  from  the  United  States ;  that  we  were  sent  by  our  and 
their  "  great  father,"  the  president,  that  we  were  going  to  the  "  great  wa- 
ters," the  Pacific,  there  to  settle  and  remain ;  that  we  were  friendly  with 
all  the  "  red  men,"  and  that  we  wished  to,  and  would  treat  them  kindly.  It 
had  been  reported  among  them,  by  some  Canadians,  at  Fort  Larimie, 
that  we  were  going  to  join  their  enemies,  the  Black-feet,  with  whom  they 
were  then  at  war.  This,  I  remarked,  they  must  be  satisfied,  was  false, 
especially  as  we  had  our  women  and  children  with  us,  of  which  they 
were  aware,  as  they  had  seen  them,  at  Fort  Larimie  and  elsewhere. 
White  men,  I  remarked,  did  not  take  their  women  and  children  when 
they  went  to  war,  nor  did  Indians.  Your  party,  I  said,  is  a  war  party, 
and  you  have  no  women  or  children,  because  they  can  not  fight.  I  then 
assured  them,  if  they  would  go  with  us,  to  our  party,  we  would  convince 
them  of  our  friendly  designs ;  that  we  would  trade  with  them,  and  make 
them  presents;  that  if  they  went  to  our  party,  it  became  necessary  to  a^t 


L 


TO    OREGON   AND   CALIFORNIA.  16 

out  very  soon,  as  it  passed  this  place  very  early  in  the  morning",  and  it  was 
then  late  in  the  day.  As  soon  as  I  had  concluded,  the  interpreter  to 
whom  I  have  alluded,  arose  and  addressed  the  chief  for  a  few  minutes,  when 
he  resumed  his  seat,  but  what  he  said,  we  were,  of  course,  anahle  to  de- 
termine, as  he  spoke  entirely  in  the  Indian  language,  yet,  our  opinion 
was,  that  he  was  repeating  what  I  had  said.  This  opinion  was  confirm- 
ed^ from  the  fact  that  immediately  upon  his  resuming  his  seat,  the  chief 
arose  and  spoke  for  about  two  minutes,  apparently,  with  much  feeling 
and  determination.  At  the  conclusion  of  his  remarks,  he  evidently  issued 
his  order,  requiring  all  to  remount,  and  to  change  their  course  in  the  di- 
rection of  our  party,  for  all  immediately  mounted,  and  resumed  their 
march  in  that  direction.  A  much  more  friendly  fc-eling  was  now  mani- 
fested towards  us ;  we  were  directed  to  take  our  position,  in  the  ranks,  at 
the  side  of  the  chief  We  soon  crossed  a  small  creek,  when  I  indicated 
to  the  chief,  by  pointing  to  the  water,  then  putting  my  fingers  to  my  lips, 
that  I  was  thirsty  ;  upon  observing  which,  he  directed  a  man  to  dismount, 
and  bring  me  some  water,  which  direction  was  readily  obeyed.  Upon 
arriving  with  the  water,  the  man  first  offered  it  to  the  chief,  who  refused 
to  take  it,  but  directed  him  to  give  it  to  me ;  which  he  did,  when  I  drank 
and  returned  him  the  cup,  which  he  again  offered  to  the  chief,  who  again 
refused  it,  directing  him  to  give  it  to  xVlr.  Lovejoy,  who  having  drunk,  the 
chief  then  received  it  and  drank.  We  now  traveled  on,  with  much  ra- 
pidity, the  "  pipe  of  peace,"  being  constantly  passed  around,  commencing 
with  the  chief,  then  to  myself,  Mr.  Lovejoy,  and  the  principal  men,  who 
were  permitted  to  ride  side  by  side  with  us,  and  who,  I  suppose,  were 
subordinate  officers. 

Having  traveled  in  this  manner,  about  two  hours,  the  spies  came  gal- 
loping from  the  hills,  informing  the  chief  that  they  had  made  some  discov- 
eries, which,  whatever  they  were,  were  of  such  importance,  that  the 
chief,  at  once,  ordered  them  all  to  dismount,  which  they  did ;  and  com- 
menced examining  their  guns,  re-loading  those  which  had  been  discharg- 
ed ;  examining  their  flints  and  locks,  and  putting  their  bows,  arrows, 
spears  and  lances  in  proper  order.  Qur  guns  were  then  given  to  us,  and 
we  were  required  to  re-load  them  ;  when  all  painted  their  faces  and  bodies, 
as  is  their  practice  previous  to  going  to  war ;  after  which  we  were  all 
Oi'dered  to  remount,  and  march,  which  we  did ;  but,  we  marched  with 
much  more  confusion  and  disorder  than  before.  The  whole  aspect  of 
things,  appeared  to  have  undergone  a  material  and  fearful  change  ;  from 
harmonious,  peaceable  and  friendly,  to  the  most  tumultuous  and  hostile. 
Although  we  were  permitted  to  ride,  side  by  side,  with  the  chief,  as  be- 
fore, yet,  I  frequently  saw  the  Indians  approach  Mr.  Lovejoy,  from  be- 
hind, \vith  drawn  spears,  lances,  or  guns,  as  if  with  a  view  of  terminating 
his  existence.  And  Mr.  Lovejoy  informed  me,  that  he  observed  the  same 
conduct  in  reference  to  myself,  of  which,  however,  I  had  no  knowledge. 
I  here  saw,  for  the  first  time,  that  what  the  spies  had  discovered,  was  our 
company,  the  tents  and  wagons  of  which  were  then  in  full  vievv'.  It  ap- 
peared evident  to  us,  from  what  we  had  "already  seen  and  what  was  then 
transpiring,  that  they  contemplated  an  attack  upon  our  party,  and  we 
were  soon  confirmed  in  this  opinion,  from  what  subsequently  followed. 
When  they  had  approached  within  two  or  three  hundred  rods  of  our 
eamp.  the  young  men,  on  each  side  of  the  chief,  commenced  a  most  furi- 


16  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

ous  charge,  and,  at  the  same  time,  uttering  the  most  alarming  and  frantic 
yells,  which  left  no  further  doubt  upon  our  minds,  but  that  they  intended 
to  attack  our  camp ;  unless  turned  from  their  purpose,  by  some  fortui- 
tous circumstance.  Perceiving  the  inevitable  tendency  of  this  course,  I 
suggested  to  the  chief,  by  signs,  that  he  should  require  his  men  to  discon- 
tinue their  charge ;  but  he  was  deaf  to  my  suggestion.  I  then  took  hold 
of  his  bridle,  stopped  his  horse,  and  insisted  that  they  must  stop,  other- 
wise, our  men  would  be  compelled  to  repel  the  assault.  Being,  by  this 
time,  satisfied  that  there  was,  perhaps,  more  danger  than  he  had  anticipa- 
ted, he  addressed  his  men  in  a  most  animated  manner,  apparently  directing 
them  to  resume  their  former  friendly  attitude,  or  at  least,  to  discontinue 
their  charge.  This  order  was  finally  obeyed,  though  evidently,  with 
much  reluctance.  Observing  that  our  men  were  in  the  most  confused 
state  of  excitement,  I  signified  to  the  chief,  that  I  would  go  to  our  camp, 
to  which,  however,  he  refused  his  assent ;  but  being  determined  to  attempt 
it,  at  all  hazards,  I  disregarded  his  dissent,  and  galloped  away.  Two 
young  warriors,  soon  came  galloping  up  by  my  side^  insisting  that  I 
should  return ;  but  I  answered  them  merely  by  telling  them,  by  signs, 
that  they  must  go  back,  or  our  men  would  shoot  and  kill  them.  This 
had  the  desired  eflx^ct:  they  returned,  and  I  increased  my  velocity,  in  the 
direction  of  our  company.  Upon  arriving  at  the  camp,  I  found  the 
greatest  imaginable  confusion  prevailing  ;  some  insisting  that  they  would 
fire,  others  opposing  it :  all  was  noisy,  alarming  disorder. 

Mr.  Lovejoy  now  having  also  arrived  in  camp,  and  order  having  been, 
to  some  extent,  restored,  I  proceeded,  through  our  Canadian  interpreter,  to 
make  certain  demands  upon  the  chief  The  first  demand  v/as,  that  he, 
immediately,  send  to  our  camp,  my  horse,  and  all  other  property  which 
his  men  had  kept,  which  belonged  either  to  Mr.  Lovejoy  or  myself  This 
demand  he  readily  complied  with,  as  far  as  he  was  able;  for,  as  he  said, 
he  could  find  but  one  of  my  pistols,  which  he  returned,  together  with  every 
thing  else  which  his  men  had  taken,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Lovejoy's 
bridle  and  martingal,  which  he  pretended  were  beyond  his  reach,  and 
not  to  be  found.  1  then  demanded,  that  he  march  his  men  away  to  a  cer- 
tain point  of  timber,  and  encamp  during  the  night;  to  comply  with  which, 
he,  at  first,  positively  refused,  insisting  that  an  old  chief,  in  his  own  coun- 
try, had  a  right  to  encamp  wherever  he  pleased  ;  but  he  finally  consented, 
when  I  informed  him  that  when  he  had  encamped,  as  directed,  he  would 
be  permitted  to  return,  with  his  chiefs  and  principal  men ;  and  smoke, 
with  us,  the  "pipe  of  peace,"  when  we  would  trade  with  them,  and  make 
him  some  presents.  Of  course,  he,  with  several  of  his  principal  men, 
soon  returned,  much  more  anxious,  however,  to  receive  the  promised 
presents,  than  to  enter  into  the  contemplated  peace  arrangements.  Hav- 
ing formed  a  vast  circle,  all  sitting  upon  the  ground,  side  by  side,  the 
*'pipe  of  peace"  was  soon  called  into  requisition,  which  was  most  indus- 
triously passed  and  re-passed  from  "white  chief  to  "red  chief,"  and  from 
"white  brave"  to  "red  brave,"  until  we  had  burned  several  ounces  o-f 
smoking  tobacco,  upon  the  altar  of  peace  ;  the  dense  fumes  of  which,  were 
cnrling  thickly  in  the  atmosphere  above;  appeasing  the  wrath  of  the 
"god  of  war,"  dispelling  native  animosity ;  and  restoring  mutual  con 
fidence,  friendship  and  peace.  After  having  concluded  our  "smoke,"  we 
traded  some  with  them,  and  gave  them  some  presents,  when  they  left  us 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  17 

apparently  with  all  good  feeling-,  which  they  expressed  in  every  possihle 
manner,  of  which  savage  barbarism  is  capable. 

From  this  encampment  we  traveled  a  few  days  up  Sweet-water,  where 
we  encamped  for  the  purpose  of  "making  meat,"  as  it  is  calhd.  Here, 
while  some  were  engaged  in  hunting  the  bufliiio,  which  were  very  abun- 
dant, others  remained  in  camp,  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  it,  and  dry- 
ing and  preserving  the  meat,  which  was  daily  brought  in,  by  the  hunters. 
While  we  remained  at  this  place,  there  was  another  accidental  discharge 
of  a  gun,  which  produced  much  alarm,  especially  among  the  ladies,  yet 
no  injury  resulted  from  it,  other  than  a  slight  flesh  wound  in  the  foot,  of 
a  small  child,  which  was  sitting  in  a  wagoti,  through  which  the  ball  p^.ss- 
cd.  At  this  encampment,  the  Indians  again,  exhibited  many  indications 
of  their  hostile  intentions.  The  small  hunting  parties,  which  were  sent 
out  for  the  purpose  of  hunting  the  buffiilo,  were  not  unfrequently  robbed 
of  both  their  meat  and  horses,  and  sent  to  camp  on  foot,  happy  in  having 
made  so  fortunate  an  escape.  And  they  not  only  frequently  robbed  the 
hunters,  but  they  also  came  to  us  in  great  numbers;  riding  and  parading 
around  our  camp,  insisting  upon  being  permitted  to  mingle  with  us,  which, 
however,  I  absolutely  refused;  and  at  the  same  time,  informed  them,  that 
any  attempt  to  approach  us,  would  be  met  with  prompt  resistance.  In 
order,  however,  to  obviate  the  necessity  of  forcible  resistance,  I  thought 
proper,  to  terrify  them  from  their  hostile  purposes,  by  appearances.  Ac- 
cordingly, I  drew  the  men  out,  in  front  of  the  camp,  assuming  as 
formidable  an  appearance  as  possible,  and  at  the  same  time,  giving  them 
assurances  of  our  friendly  feelings  :  but  determined  purpose,  to  resist  any 
attempt,  to  approach  our  encampment.  This  course  had  the  desired  ef- 
fect; seeing  our  firm  determination  to  resist  them,  they  loitered  about  our 
camp  a  few  hours,  when  they  confusedly  dispersed,  amid  the  wild  roar  of 
savage  clamor. 

Leaving  this  encampm.ent,  we  saw  nothing  more  of  them,  for  several 
days  ;  but  coming  again,  upon  a  tributary  of  Sweet-water,  we  met  with 
them,  in  increased  numbers.  They  numbered,  at  this  place,  not  less,  per- 
haps, than  one  thousand  or  fifteen  hundred.  Their  numbers  being  now, 
so  increased,  and  it  being  unknown  w^hether  they  were  hostile,  I  thought 
proper  to  encamp,  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  and  disposing  of  them,  as 
circumstances  might  require.  Accordingly,  we  encamped,  when  they 
advanced  with  much  rapidity,  and  with  most  furious  whoops  and  yells, 
displaying,  at  the  same  time,  their  flags  of  most  beautiful  and  variegated 
colors.  I  now,  gave  them  the  signal  to  stop,  which  they  promptly  obey- 
ed, dismounted,  and  planted  their  flag-staffs  ;  exhibiting  their  colors  to  the 
best  possible  advantage.  They  were  now  arrayed,  fronting  our  camp,  at 
least,  fifty  abreast,  and  ten  or  twelve  deep ;  and  our  greatest  anxiety,  of 
course,  was  to  ascertain  whether  they  were  peaceably  inclined ;  for 
which  purpose,  my  horse  having  been  saddled,  I  mounted  and  galloped 
out  to  them,  when  I  informed  them,  that  we  would  "  talk"  with  them 
a  few  minutes,  "  smoke"  with  them,  and  give  them  some  presents,  when 
we  were  desirous  of  continuing  our  journey.  The  chiefs  having  mani- 
fested their  approbation  of  this  course,  I  invited  them  to  our  camp,  to 
*'  talk"  and  "  smoke"  Avith  us,  and  receive  the  presents,  when  we  would  all 
disperse.  They  accepted  the  invitation,  and  started  with  us  to  our  camp  ; 
but  as  we  started,  the  main  body  of  the  Indians  also  started  to  go  with  us, 
3 


18  THE    EMIGRANTS'    GUIDE 

to  have  permitted  which,  would  have  been  dangerous  in  the  extreme  ;  I, 
therefore,  remarked  to  the  chiefs,  that  the  invitation,  was  only  extended  to 
them,  and  that,  we  would  expect  the  residue  of  the  Indians,  to  remain 
where  thoy  were,  as  much  confusion,  and  perhaps,  difficulty,  might  result 
from  their  intermingling-  with  our  people.  They  replied  through  their 
interpreter,  in  their  brief  manner,  "  it  is  good,"  "  it  is  right."  Then  turn- 
ing to  their  men,  they  gave  them  orders  to  remain,  until  they  should  re- 
turn. We  then  proceeded  to  our  "talk,"  and  "smoke,"  which  engaged 
our  attention  about  two  hours  ;  when  we  distributed  the  promised  pres- 
ents among  them,  took  our  leave  of  them,  and  pursued  our  journey; 
while  they  returned  to  their  villages,  with  the  kindest  feelings  and  the 
warmest  friendship,  for  the  "  while  man  of  the  East."  As  we  passed 
their  villages,  which  were  but  a  few  hundred  yards  from  our  route,  hun- 
dreds of  the  women  and  children  thronged  our  way,  gazing  upon  us  with 
the  utmost  astonishment;  and  many  of  the  men  followed  us,  even  until 
night,  when,  after  having  effected  many  profitable  trades  in  horses  and 
mules,  they  returned  to  th^^r  villages,  rejoicino-  in  the  happy  anticipation, 
of  the  extraordinary  advantages,  to  be  derived  from  their  new  acquaint- 
ances, thus  favorably  formed. 

A  few  days  subsequently,  a  rather  serious  difference  occurred,  which 
arose  from  the  refusal  of  one  of  our  men,  to  stand  his  guard,  in  confor- 
mity to  the  regulations  of  the  party.  His  refusal  being  reported  to  the 
proper  officers,  he  was  subjected  to  a  trial,  and  found  guilty,  when  the 
ordinary  sentence  v/as  passed  upon  him,  to  v/hich,  he  refused  to  submit. 
The  officers,  however,  informed  him,  that  he  Avould  be  required  absolute- 
ly, to  comply  with  the  sentence,  or  submit  to  expulsion  from  the  party; 
after  which,  he  would  not  be  permitted  either  to  travel,  or  encamp  with 
the  company.  As  he  still  refused  to  comply  with  the  sentence,  ten  men 
were  ordered  to  arm  themselves,  and  remove  him,  and  his  effects,  at  least, 
one  mile  from  the  encampment.  They  accordingly  repaired  to  his  tent, 
informing  him  of  their  orders,  and  determination  to  carry  them  into  effect, 
unless  he  should,  immediately,  agree  to  comply  with  the  sentence.  He 
still  remained  obstinate,  refusing  to  comply,  and  at  the  same  time,  ap- 
peared to  be  making  arrangements  for  his  defence,  against  any  attempt 
to  effect  his  forcible  removal.  No  one,  however,  apprehended  the  least 
danger  from  any  movement  on  his  part;  for  we  had  already,  witnessed 
several  exhibitions  of  his  bravery.  The  men  designated  to  remove  him, 
now  informed  him,  notwithstanding  his  threats,  that  it  became  their  duty 
to  remove  him  from  the  encampment,  "  dead  or  alive,"  and  that  they  in- 
tended to  discharge  that  duty  at  all  hazards.  This  decided  course  soon 
brought  him  to  his  senses,  when  he,  through  a  friend  of  his,  or  rather,  a 
friend  of  order,  suggested  that  he  be  allowed  a  re-hearing,  which  was  ac- 
cordingly granted  him,  by  the  officers.  On  the  following  day,  after  ar- 
riving at  the  encampment,  a  jury  was  summoned  to  investigate  and  deter- 
mine the  matter,  who,  after  having  heard  the  evidence,  and  deliberated 
for  a  few  moments,  acquitted  the  violator  of  orders,  upon  the  condition 
that  he,  thereafter,  punctually  discharge  every  duty  devolving  upon  him, 
in  reference  to  standing  guard,  and  otherwise  ;"  which  he  did  afterwards, 
with  unusual  punctuality.  He  had  so  profited  by  this  lesson,  that  day  or 
night,  rain  or  shine,  he  was  always  to  be  found  at  his  post;  or  from  it, 
as  the  various  orders  happened  to  suggest. 

Nothing  further,  worthy  of  remark,  occurred  until  we  reached  the 


TO    OREGON    AND    CALIFORNIA.  19 

Colorado  of  the  west,  or  Green  river,  where  we  encamped  for  several 
days.  During  our  stay  at  this  place,  it  was  sugg-ested  that  we  leave  our 
wagons,  in  order  to  facilitate  our  progress.  This  proposition  was  made, 
and  insisted  upon,  by  those  who  had  an  anxiety  to  reach  Fort  Hall,  at  an 
early  day,  for  reasons  unknown  to  us ;  and  for  the  promotion  of  interests 
foreign  from  ours ;  yet,  so  urgently  was  it  insisted  upon,  and  so  cogent 
were  many  of  the  reasons,  which  were  urged,  that  several  of  the  party 
determined  to  leave  their  wagons,  and  to  prosecute  the  residue  of  their 
journey  on  horseback ;  while  I,  together  with  a  majority  of  the  party, 
was  of  the  opinion,  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  leave  the  wagons,  conse- 
quently, we  determined  to  take  them  to  Fort  Hall,  at  least,  that  being  the 
extent  to  which  they  had  been  previously  taken.  We  accordingly,  pro- 
ceeded to  make  our  arrangements  to  go  on  with  our  wagons,  leaving 
those  behind,  who  had  determined  to  leave  theirs,  as  they  were  under 
the  necessity  of  converting  them  into  packsaddles,  which,  by  the  by, 
was  attended  with  much  labor  and  inconvenience.  Our  guide,  Mr.  Fitz- 
pateric,  concurring  in  opinion,  with  those  who  had  determined  to  leave 
their  wagons,  remained  with  them,  the  consequence  of  which  was,  that 
we  were  under  the  necessity  of  prosecuting  the  residue  of  our  journey- 
without  a  guide ;  unless  we  should  accidentally  fill  in  with  one,  else- 
where. Many  of  those  who  designed  to  leave  their  wagons,  urged  us  to 
leave  ours  also,  insisting  that  if  we  took  them  on,  we  would  arrive  at 
Fort  Hall,  so  late  in  the  season,  that  we  would  be  under  the  necessity  of 
remaining  there  during  the  winter  ;  or  that  we  would  perish  in  our  at- 
tempt to  cross  the  Blue  mountains.  Others  insisted  that  as  we  had  no 
guide,  it  would  be  utterly  impossible  for  us  to  find  our  way  to  Fort  Hall, 
and  that,  consequently,  we  would  inevitably,  perish  by  the  way.  We, 
however,  confident  in  our  own  ability  to  do  what  others  had  done  :  and  be- 
lieving that  "  some  things  could  be  done  as  v/ell  as  others,''  determined  to 
pursue  our  journey  at  all  events,  and  at  all  hazards,  with,  or  without  a 
guide,  as  circumstances  might  determine.  Seeing  our  determination,  a 
Mr.  Meek,  who  had  formerly  passed  through  that  region,  as  far  as  Fort 
Hall,  offered  his  services  as.our  guide.  Believing  that  he  might  be  found 
serviceable  to  us,  to  some  extent,  at  least,  we  employed  him,  when  we  were 
soon  in  readiness  for  our  departure.  The  order  being  given  to  march, 
our  friends  now  crowded  around  us,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  their  leave 
of  us,  and,  at  the  same  time,  lamenting  the  necessity  which  impelled  our 
separation.  Some,  still  insisted  upon  our  remaining,  while  others,  in. 
their  terrified  imaginations,  already  saw  us  winding  our  fearful  way  over 
mountains  of  perpetual  snow,  falling  victim  to  raging  famine,  and  the 
piercing  cold,  of  eternal  winter ;  and  others  still,  by  a  more  enlarged 
view  of  futurity,  saw  us  very  distinctly,  deviating  far  from  the  proper  route ; 
falling  victim  to  the  savage  ferocity,  of  the  more  than  barbarous  Black- 
feet.  There  were  others  still,  who  not  having  as  clear  a  view,  as  their 
friends,  of  the  hidden  mysteries  of  futurity,  examined  its  dark  pages,  ia 
vain,  for  conclusive  evidences  of  our  destiny ;  hence  they  determined, 
that  separating  now,  we  were  separated  forever ;  that  no  traces  of  us 
would  ever  afterwards  be  found.  Amid  this  disparity  of  prophetic  opin- 
ion, as  well  as  the  urgent  solicitations  of  our  friends  to  remain,  which 
were  insisted  upon  with  much  anxiety  and  sincerity,  even  to  the  shedding 
of  tears,  we  now  took  a  most  solemn  and  affectionate  leave  of  each  other ; 
some  expecting  to  be  so  fortunate  as  to  meet  again  at  Fort  Hall ;  others 


20  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

never  expecting  to  meet  ag-ain  in  this  world  ;  while  others  still,  lost  ali 
hope  of  uniting  again,  either  in  this  world,  or  the  Avorld  to  come.  Leav- 
ing our  obstinate  friends,  as  we  thought  them,  we  now  moved  onward, 
while  they  resumed  their  extraordinary  business  of  converting  wagons 
into  packsaddles.  We  had  passed  on  but  a  few  days,  when  contrary  to 
oar  own  expectations,  and  contrary  to  all  the  lights  of  prophecy  before  iis^ 
we  all  arrived,  about  the  same  time,  at  Fort  Hall ;  we  with,  and  they 
without  their  wagons. 

Upon  arriving  at  this  fort,  we  were  received  in  the  kindest  manner,  by 
Mr.  Grant,  who  was  in  charge  ;  and  we  received  every  aid  and  attention 
from  the  gentlemen  of  tliat  fort,  during  our  stay  in  their  vicinity.  We 
were  here  informed,  by  Mr.  Grant,  and  otljier  gentlemen  of  the  company, 
that  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to  take  ovr  wagons  down  to  the  Pacjfic, 
consequently,  a  meeting  of  the  party  was  called,  for  the  purpose  of  de- 
termining whether  we  should  take  them  further,  or  leave  them  at  this  fort, 
from  which  place  it  appeared,  that  we  coaldl  take  them,  about  half  way  to 
the  Pacific,  without  serious  interruption.  Some  insisted  that  the  great 
convenience  of  having  wagons  witli  us,  woi\ld  amply  warrant  taking  them 
as  far  as  M^e  could;  while  otliers  thought,  a^  we  would  eventually  be  un- 
der the  necessity  of  leaving  them,  it  v/ould  be  preferable  to  leave  them, 
at  the  fort,  especially  as  we  could  iliere  oljtuin  tools,  and  ail  other  means 
of  manufacturing  our  packing  equipage,  wliidi  we  could  not  do  elsewhere. 
Another  reason  which  wns  urged  in  favor  of  leaving  them  was,  that 
we  could,  perhaps,  sell  them  for  something  at  this  place,  which  we  could 
do,  at  no  other  point  upon  the  route.  The  vote  h.aving  been  taken,  it 
was  found  that  a  large  vnajority  was  opposed  to  taking  them  any  further, 
the  consequence  of  which  was,  that  there  was  no  alternative  for  the  mi 
nority,  as  our  little  government  was  purely  democratic,  Mr.  Grant  pur- 
chased a  few  of  our  wagons,  for  a  mere  trifle,  which  he  paid  in  such 
provisons  as  he  could  dispose  of,  without  injury  to  himself.  He  could 
not  of  course,  afford  to  give  much  for  them,  as  lie  did  not  need  them,  but 
bought  them  merely  as  an  accomm.oda'iion.  Those  who  did  not  sell  to 
Mr.  Grant,  got  nothing  for  theirs  ;  but  left  them  there,  to  be  destroyed 
by  the  Indians,  as  soon  as  we  had  commenced  our  march.  This  was  a 
serious  loss,  as  most  of  the  wagons  and  harness,  were  very  valuable. 
Eight  or  ten  days  were  occupied,  in  consummating  our  arrangements  for 
tlie  residue  of  our  cheerless  journey.  In  the  interim,  those  of  our  com- 
pany, wh*  left  us  at  Gretn  river,  had  accomplished  their  preliminary  ar- 
rangements, and  had  gone  on,  several  days  in  advance.  We  were  ena- 
bled, at  this  fort,  to  exchange  our  poor  and  way-worn  horses,  for  those 
which  had  not  been  injured  by  use ;  having  done  which,  to  considerable 
extent ;  having  purchased  many ;  having  procured  such  additional  pro- 
visions as  could  be  obtained ;  and  having  convinced  ourselves  that  we 
were  invincible,  we,  once  more,  resumed  our  dangerous  journey,  over 
the  burning  sands,  and  through  the  trackless  deserts  of  Oregon. 

Upon  this  portion  of  our  journey,  we  had  anticipated  many  difficul- 
ties and  hardships,  especially,  as  we  were  entirely  unacquainted  with  our 
new  method  of  traveling,  and  as  we  were  unable  to  procure  a  guide  ;  yet, 
we  proceeded  with  much  less  difficulty  than  we  had  anticipated.  Arriv- 
ing at  Fort  Boisia,  we  were  very  kindly  received  and  entertained  by  the 
gentleman  in  charge,  M^ho  kindly  proffered  to  let  us  have  such  provisions 
as  we  needed,  and  to  render  us  any  additional  service  in  his  power.    Here 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA  21 

we  learned  that  a  young  man,  of  the  advance  of  our  party,  was  drowned, 
in  crossing  Lewis'  river.  ■  It  appeared  that  the  portion  of  the  party  to 
which  he  belonged,  crossed  this  river  at  the  usual  ford,  which  is  consider- 
ed entirely  safe,  by  those  wiio  are  acquainted  Avith  it,  but  this  young  man 
deviating  from  the  usual  crossing,  and  disregarding  the  directions  of  his 
friends,  was  swept  away  in  an  instant.  He  soon  became  detached  from 
his  horse,  and  appeared  to  be  standing  permanently/  upon  the  bottom, 
when  several  called  to  him,  requesting  him  to  stand  until  they  could  come 
to  his  relief.  He,  however,  not  heeding,  or  perhaps,  not  hearing  what 
was  said  to  him,  leaped  fearfully  from  his  position,  as  if  with  a  view  of 
swimmingto  the  shore,  but  he  was  swept  away  by  the  current,  with  the 
rapidity  of  lightning ;  and  neither  himself,  nor  his  horse,  was  ever  seen, 
or  heard  of  after.  He  was  a  German,  the  same  unfortunate  young  man, 
who  caused  the  death  of  Mr.  Bailey,  of  which  I  have  before  spoken. 
The  portion  of  the  party  to  which  I  belonged,  did  not  cross  the  river,  but 
kept  directly  down  it,  upon  the  south  side.  Leaving  Fort  Boisia,  the 
next  place  of  note,  at  which  we  arrived,  was  a  presbyterian  mission,  in 
charge  of  which,  is  a  Dr.  Whitman,  who  is  a  very  kind  and  hospitable 
gentleman.  He  received  us  v/ith  the  utmost  kindness  and  attention,  and 
insisted  upon  our  remaining  a  few  days  with  him,  in  order-  to  obtain 
some  relaxation  of  both  body  and  mind,  to  which  proposition,  we  fuially 
acceded.  Our  stay  with  the  doctor,  included  the  Sabbath,  during  which 
day,,  we  attended  divine  service,  at  his  residence.  In  the  forenoon,  he 
delivered  a  discourse  to  the  Indians,  in  their  own  language,  to  which  they 
appeared  to  be  very  attentive,  evidently  comprehending  the  truths  and 
doctrines  inculcated.  Having  had  a  few  hours  intermission,  we  again 
convened,  when  the  doctor  delivered  a  very  able  discourse  to  our  com- 
pany, the  other  members  of  the  mission,  and  his  family.  Tliis  scene 
was  the  more  interesting  to  us,  as  we  had  then,  for  the  last  four  mouths, 
heard  nothing  but  the  terrific  howl  of  wild  beasts  of  prey,  and  the  furi- 
ous midnight  yell,  of  a  hostile  and  barbarous  foe.  Tlie  doctor  is  not  only 
a  very  kind  and  hospitable  gentleman,  but  he  is  no  doubt,  a  very  good 
man,  and  a  devoted  christian.  He  appears  to  be  rendering  great  ser- 
vice, in  christianizing  and  civilizing  the  natives.  We  spent  a  few  days 
at  this  place,  during  v/hich  time,  we  were  enabled  to  exchange  many 
horses  Avith  the  Indians,  as  vv^ell  as,  to  purchase  many,  and  also,  to  obtain 
our  additional  supply  of  provisions,  which,  having  been  done  to  the  ex- 
tent that  we  desired,  we  again  proceeded  upon  our  dismal  journey. 

The  first  day  after  leaving  this  mission  we  passed  Fort  Wallawalla,  at 
which  place  we  stopped  but  a  few  minutes,  when  we  passed  on,  and  in 
a  few  days,  arrived  at  the  methodist  mission  at  t!ie  dalles.  Mr.  Perkins 
is  in  charge  of  this  mission.  He  bestowed  every  attention  upon  us,  and 
rendered  us  every  aid  in  his  power.  We,  however,  remained  but  a  few 
days  here,  v/hen  we,  once  more,  re-commenced  our  pilgrimage ;  and 
without  any  thing  further  worthy  of  remark,  we  arrived,  on  the  fifth  day 
of  October,  in  the  lower  settlements  of  Oregon.  The  mind  was  now 
naturally  thrown  back  upon  the  past,  brouglit  to  contemplate  upon  the 
present,  and  led  to  anticipate  the  future.  Having  left  the  land  of  our  na- 
tivity, having  torn  ourselves  from  our  relatives  and  friends,  having  passed 
through  innumerable  dangers,  both  seen  and  unseen ;  having  been  for  the 
last  four  long  months  surrounded  only  by  hordes  of  barbarous  Indians, 
herds  of  wild  beasts  of  prey,  and  danger  and  death  in  all  their  various 


22  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

and  varied  forms,  we  had  now,  arrived  at  our  place  of  destination ;  and 
were  about  to  locate  in  the  wild  forests  of  Oregon.  Here  we  v/ere,  cut 
off  almost  entirely,  from  all  communication  with  our  connections  and 
friends  ;  in  a  wild  uncultivated  region  ;  more  than  two  thousand  miles 
from  the  land  that  gave  us  birth  ;  with  no  promise  of  support  or  protec- 
tion from  our  government ;  exposed  to  the  inclemencies  of  a  dreary- 
rainy  season,  of  about  five  months,  of  almost  incessant  rain,  hail,  sleet 
j,'Uid  snow  ;  without  houses,  without  a  sufficiency  of  clothing,  or  provis- 
ion ;  entirely  destitute  of  the  means  of  agriculture  ;  and  surrounded  with 
innumerable  savages,  with  vv^hose  disposition  as  to  peace  or  war,  we 
were  entirely  unacquainted.  Under  these  circumstances,  we  were  very 
naturally  led  to  inquire,  Iiow  long  this  state  of  things  was  destined  to  ex- 
ist. If  this  country  is  such  as  it  has  been  represented,  if  it  is  so  fertile 
and  productive  ;  if  it  is  so  eminently  calculated  to  promote  the  prosperity 
and  happiness  of  man,  will  not  our  government,  soon  extend  her  juris- 
diction and  laws  over  it,  so  as  to  insure  our  future  protection;  to  encour- 
;;L'"e  oniigration  and  to  promote  enterprise  ?  An  affirmative  answer  to  this 
(^iie;  tiv.ii,  ^vas  all  our  hope,  all  our  consolatiou,  for  otherwise,  as  circum- 
.'•.:n:iees  and  tbangs  v;erc,  we  could  see  nothing  to  warrant  this  tremendous 
I?ap  iiuo  these  dark  and  wild  regions,  of  the  "  western  world."  The 
country  did  not  appear  to  us,  to  be  in  reality,  that  delightful  region  which 
vfe  had  ilius  long  and  laboriously  sought.  Dismay  and  .dissatisfaction 
apueareu  to  be  visibly  impressed  upon  every  countenance,  and  deep  dis- 
content pervaded  every  breast.  All,  however,  soon  obtained  temporary 
residences,  Doctor  McLoughlin  kindly  proffered  to  render  tliem  any  as- 
sistance in  Ills  power.  He  proposed  to  sell  goods  on  a  credit,  to  all  those 
v>'ho  were  unable  to  make  immediate  pnyraent.  He  also  comrnen-^ed 
buildiug  extensively,  at  the  falls  of  the  Wallannnede,  and  thereby  gave 
iiiiyncdiate  employment,  at  the  liighest  wnges,  to  all  those  who  wished  to 
labor.  Many  engaged  in  labor  for  the  doctor,  others  for  the  mission, 
while  others  selected, and  settled  upon  their  "  claims,"  in  the  various  por- 
lions  of  the  country,  improviug  them  as  they  best  could,  under  these  very 
;!ufavorable  circumstances.  In  the  spring,  it  was  found  that  the  dissatis- 
la(  lion  had,  in  a  great  measure,  subsided,  yet,  m.any  were  still,  much  dissat- 
isfied', and  determined  to  leave  the  country,  as  soon  as  an  opportunity 
should  }n-esent.  Some  desired  to  return  to  the  States,  while  others  de- 
termined to  avail  themselves  of  the  first  opportunity  of  going  to  Califor- 
nia, to  wln'ch  latter  country,  many  of  them>  have  subsequently  gone^ 
where  they  are  entirely  satisfied. 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  23 

CHAPTER  III. 
A  DESCRIPTION  OF  OREGON. 

Boundary;  by  what  authority  established.  Authority  by  which  Bnlish  sub- 
jects occupy  Oregon.  Natural  divisions.  Eastern,  Western,  and  Middle 
sections.  Different  ranges  of  mountains.  Description  of  Rocky  mountains; 
their  altitude;  their  passes;  their  spurs.  Description  of  Blue  mountains; 
their  elevation;  their  spurs.  Description  of  Cascade  mountains;  their 
peaks,  various  spurs.  Description  of  rivers;  Columbia;  its  source,  course, 
and  navigation.  Upper  and  Lower  dalles.  Flat-bow  river.  Clarke's 
river.  Upper  and  Lower  lakes.  Lake  Kidlerspehn.  Spokan  river.  Lake 
Cuer  dWlene.  Okanagan  river.  Lake  Okanagan.  Y'>Akama  river.  Piscous 
river.  Entyatecoom  river.  Saptin  or  Lewis  river.  Kooskooske  river.  Salmon 
river.  Wallawalla  river.  Umatilla  river.  Qu.isneVs  river.  .John  Day's 
river.  De'  Chustis  river.  The  falls,  dalles  and  cascades.  Wallamette  river; 
its  falls.  Klackamus  river.  Fualiiine  river.  Yam-hill  river.  Putin  river: 
Cawlity  river.  Frasier^s  river.  Stewarfs  river.  CJiilcotin  river.  Pinkslitza 
river.  QuesncU's  river.  Chilkeelis  river.  Umpqua  river.  Rogue's  river. 
Klamet  river.    Rise  of  rivers. 

The  reader  having  now  arrived  in  Oregon,  he  is,  no  doubt,  anxious  to 
enter  upon  an  exploration  of  that  much  admired  region.  I  will  therefore, 
proceed  with  liira,  to  take  that  brief  view  of  the  country,  which  the  title- 
page  contemplates.  The  extreme  brevit}^  of  this  description  will,  how- 
ever, undoubtedly,  lender  it  more  or  less  unsatisfactory ;  yet  I  shall  en- 
deavor to  crowd  together,  as  much  useful  and  practical  matter  as  possible, 
upon  the  fevv^  pagfs,  which,  from  the  very  narrow  limits  of  this  little 
work,  I  am  allowed  to  devote  to  this  branch  of  my  subject. 

Oregon  territory  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  Rocky  mountains  ;  on 
the  south  by  Upper  California  ;  on  the  west  by  the  Pacific  ocean  :  and 
on  the  north  by  the  British  possessions.  The  southern  boundary  was 
determined  in  the  year  1819,  by  a  treaty  betvv^een  the  United  States  and 
Spain,  which  is  commonly  called  the  Florida  treaty.  It  stipulates  that 
the  boundar)^  between  the  possessions  of  the  two  nations,  west  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi river,  shall  be  as  follov/s:  "  following  the  course  of  the  southern 
bank  of  the  Arkansas  to  its  source,  in  latitude  42  degrees  north,  and 
thence,  by  that  parallel  of  latitude,  to  the  South  sea."  This  boundary 
was  confirmed  by  Mexico,  as  the  successor  of  Spain,  in  the  year  1828, 
consequently,  there  is  no  dispute  or  difference  as  to  the  southern  boun- 
dary. The  northern  boundary  was  settled  in  1823,  by  treaty  between 
the  United  States  and  Russia,  at  54  degrees  and  40  minutes  north  lati- 
tude. These  treaties  then,  fix  and  determine  the  boundaries,  as  between 
the  United  States,  Spain,  Russia  and  Mexico,  wdiich  are,  in  truth,  the  only 
powers  that  ever  had  any  just  claim,  to  any  portion  of  that  territory. 
Great  Britain,  however,  latterly  asserts  a  pretended  claim,  adverse  to  that 
of  the  United  States,  to  a  portion  of  that  country.  But  so  far  from  having 
any  valid  claim  to  any  portion  of  it,  she  has  no  right  even  to  occupy  it ;  other 
than  that  ri'ght  guarantied  to  her,  hy  the  convention  of  L9i8,  the  third  ar- 
ticle of  which  provides,  "  that  any  country  that  may  be  claimed  by  either 
party,  on  the  northwest  coast  of  America,  westward  of  the  Stony  moun- 
tains, shall,  together  with  its  harbors,  bays  and  creeks,  and  the  navigation 


24  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

of  all  rivers  within  the  same,  be  free  and  open  for  the  term  of  ten  years, 
from  the  date  of  the  signature  of  the  present  convention,  to  the  vessels, 
citizens  an.'  subjects  of  the  two  powers.  It  being  well  understood,  that 
this  agreement  is  not  to  be  construed  to  the  prejudice  of  any  claim,  which 
either  of  the  two  high, contracting  parties, may  have  to  any  part  of  said 
country."  The  same  provisions  were  indefinitely  extended  by  the  con- 
vention of  1827;  with  the  further  agreement,  however,  "that  it  should 
be  competent  for  either  party,  at  any  time  after  the  20th  day  of  October, 
1828,  on  giving  due  notice,  of  twelve  months,  to  the  other  contracting  party, 
to  annul  and  abrogate  said  convention.-'  It  is  my  purpose  here,  however, 
merely  to  state  the  boundaries  of  Oregon,  to  give  the  authority  by  which 
they  are  established;  and  to  give  the  authority  by  which, the  subjects  of 
Great  Britam  occupy  that  country,  conjointly  with  citizens  of  the  United 
olatf  s.  Having  done  which,  to  an  extent  sufficient  for  ordinary  purposes, 
i  will  now.  enter  upon  a  more  detailtd  description  of  Oregon  territory. 

This  territory  is  naturally  divided  into  three  distinct  divisions  or  sec- 
lions,  which, for  convenience,  I  shall  call  the  Eastern,  Middle  and  Western 
sections.  The  Eastern  section  includes  all  that  country  between  the 
Rocky  and  the  Blue  Mountains;  the  Middle  section  that  between  the  Blue 
and  the  Cascade  mountains;  and  the  Western  section,  that  between  the 
Cascade  mountains  and  the  Pacific  ocean.  These  ranges,  which  thus 
divide  this  country  into  distinct  sections,  together  with  their  spurs,  will 
now  receive  a  more  particular  notice  ;  commencing  with  the  Rocky 
mountains.  The  course  of  this  range  is,  generally,  from  the  southeast 
to  the  northwest ;  and  its  distance  from  the  sea  is,  generally,  from  500  to 
1000  miles  :  it  is  of  great  altitude,  and  is  usually  covered  with  perpetual 
snow.  The  greatest  elevations  in  all  Oregon,  are  found  in  this  range, 
many  of  which  are  more  than  25,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea. 
L'rom  the  foregoing  remarks,  and  from  the  well  known  fact,  of  the  entire 
sterility  of  all  this  range,  it  will  be  readily  seen,  that  it  is  in  no  wise, 
adapted  to  the  support  of  man  or  beast.  Instead  of  vegetation  and  timber, 
in  the  more  elevated  regions  of  this  range,  nothing  but  mountains  of 
eternal  snow  are  any  where  seen.  From  the  extraordinary  altitude  and 
sterility  of  this  range,  it  would  be  utterly  impassable,  were  it  not  for  cer- 
tain gaps,  or  passes.  Of  these,  there  are  five,  which  are  -known,  and 
through  which  emigrants,  traders,  trappers  and  Indians  annually  pass,  in 
greater  or  less  numbers,  drprnding  upon  the  inducements,  and  tho  prac- 
ticability of  the  pass.  The  principal  of  these,  is  the  well  known  great 
southern  pass,  at  latitude  42  deg.  north,  through  which  companies  of  em- 
igrants and  others,  are  annually  passing,  from  the  United  States  to  Ore- 
gon and  California.  That  through  which  the  fur-traders  ofthe  Hudson's 
Bay  Company  annually  pass,  is  situated  between  Brown's  and  Hooker's 
peaks;  a  third  between  the  sources  of  Maria's  and  Clarke's  rivers  ;  and  a 
fourth  is  near  the  southern  head  waters  of  the  Missouri;  and  the  fifth  is 
between  Henry's  fork  of  Lewis'river,  and  Big-horn,  a  branch  of  Yellow- 
stone. The  first  of  the?e  passes  is  much  the  most  important,  and  hence,  it 
will  receive  a  further  notice  upon  a  subsequent  page. 

This  range,  like  all  the  ranges  of  this  country,  has  numerous  spurs, 
many  of  which,  are  also  of  extraordinary  akitude.  The  principal  of 
them,  I  will  now  briefly  describe.  The  first,  which  I  shall  notice,  is 
that  lying  north  of  Frasier's  river,  and  in  Avhich  that  river  takes  its  rise. 
It  has  many  high  peaks,  several  of  which  are  covered  with  snow  the 


\ 

\ 

TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  ?2£ 

oreater  part  of  the  year.  It  is  a  vast  concatenation  of  peak?  and^b/  ^S'Us^ 
whicii  are  covered  here  and  there,  with  a  small  growth  of  firs  n  •.  ■  s. 

From  this  spur,  another  puts  out  for  a  considerable  extent,  dow  ^  1  ^  -i 

bia  river;  and  another  branch  of  the  same  spur,  extends  ''o;/n  rmiv.i ,  ,. 
river,  about  the  same  distance.  The  altitude  of  both  br  nchc"?  dtV  this 
spur,  is  less  than  that  at  the  source  of  Frasier's  river,  yet  't  h;.  several 
high  peaks,  near  the  Columbia.  It  is  generally  rather  spart  ly  li,...  :ei«ed ; 
bu^t  in  many  places,  it  is  covered  with  dense  forests  of  low  oim  s  _  A 
spur  of  lofty  elevations,  and  of  extraordinary  sterility,  lies  south  of  i  mi 
Hooker,  in  the  great  bend  of  the  Columbia ;  it  is  slightly  covered  with 
veg-etation  and  shrubs,  but,  generally,  it  produces  no  kind  of  vegetation 
whatever.  Between  the  Flat-head  and  the  Flat-bow  rivers,  there  is  an- 
other spur,  which  is  quite  similar  to  that  just  described,  or,  if  possible, 
more  sterile  and  worthless.  Between  the  Flat-head  and  the  Spokan, 
there  is  also  another  spur,  which  has  several  very  elevated  peaks.  The 
greatest  part  of  this  spur,  is  thickly  covered  with  trees,  shrubs  and  the 
grasses.  The  only  remaining  spur,  worthy  o-f  notice,  in  connection  with 
this  range,  is  that  ranging  near  the  Kooskooske  river.  It  consists  of 
high  rugged  cliffs  and  peaks,  many  of  which  are  entirely  destitute  of 
timber,  or  vegetation,  yet  the  less  elevated  portions  of  them,  are  thickly 
covered  with  firs,  pines,  and  a  thick  undergrowth  of  shrubs  and  bushes, 
This  spur  appears  to  be  connected  with  the  Blue  mountains,  and  to  form 
a  portion  of  that  range. 

The  Blue  mountains  commence  between  the  forty-fifth,  and  the  forty- 
sixth  degrees  of  north  latitude,  and  run  south,  to  tlie  southern  boundary 
of  Oregon,  where  the}^  intersect  the  Klamet  range.  They  constitute  a  very 
irregular  range,  and  are  tliought  by  many  not  to  be  a  distinct  range,  but 
to  consist  entirely  of  spurs  of  the  Rocky  mountains  ;  but  tlie  better  opin- 
ion is,  that  they  are,  of  themselves,  a  distinct  range  ;  for  tliey  are  entirely 
separated  from  the  Rocky  mountains,  by  several  large  valleys.  The 
general  cUrection  of  this  range  is  about  north  and  soutJi,  and  its  distance 
from  the  coast  is  usually,  from  three  to  five  hundred  miles.  Its  altitude  is 
much  less  than  that  of  either  of  the  other  ranges  mentioned,  yet  it  has 
several  peaks,  which  are  about  ten  or  eleven  thousand  feet  above  the  level 
of  the  sea,  and  which  are  covered  with  perpetual  snow.  This  range  is 
much  less  sterile  than  the  Rocky  mountain  range;  it  has  numerous  de- 
pressions, elevated  plains,  and  valleys  of  limited  extent,  which  produce' 
an  abundance  of  grass,  and  most  excellent  timber ;  consisting  principally 
of  fir,  pine  and  cedar  of  the  best  quality.  This  range,  like  that  before 
described,  has  numerous  spurs,  some  of  which  are  immediately  connect- 
ed with  the  range,  and  others  appear  to  have  little  or  no  connection  with 
it ;  but  upon  examination,  are  found  to  be  spurs  of  that  range. 

The  Cascade  mountains  constitute  that  range  which  lies  nearest  the 
coast,  and  which  is  called  the  Cascade,  or  President's  range.  The 
course  of  this  range  is  nearly  parallel  with  the  coast ;  its  average  dis- 
tance from  which,  is  from  one  to  two  hundred  miles ;  and  it  is  surpassed  in 
altitude  only  by  the  Rocky  mountains.  It  has  twelve  lofty  peaks,  several 
of  which  are  from  twelve  to  eighteen  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
sea,  rising  in  perfect  cones,  and  covered  perpetually  with  snow.  Five  of 
these  have  received  the  names  of  the  former  deceased  presidents  of  the 
United  States.  These  names  were  given  them,  by  a  Mr.  Kelley,  a  trav- 
4 


2C  THE   EMIGRANTS'    GUIDE 

eler  isfpm  the  United  States,  several  years  ago,  and  they  have  ever  siric6 
retain^  J  them  ;  hence  it  is  that  this  range  is  now  called  tlie  Presidents' 
range/.  T.'ie  other  seven  of  these  extraordinary  conical  peaks,  have  re- 
ceive/d  their  names  from  various  English  travelers  and  navigators.  But 
five  of  this  seven,  have  latterly,received  the  names  of  five  other  presidents 
of  jlhe  United  States.  These  names,  I  will  also  ado])t,  as  I  much  prefer 
our  own  names,  for  our  own  property.  Tlie  remaining  two  of  these 
siiigular  elevations,  are  called  mount  Fareweather,  and  mount  St.  Elias, 
both  of  which,  are  situated  north  of  the  northern  boundary  of  Oregon. 
Now  iiaving  our  own  names  for  each  of  these,  which  are  within  our  own 
territory,  I  will  proceed  to  give  a  brief  description  of  them,  in  their  pro- 
per order.  Mount  Washington  is  situated  near  latitude  44°  north,  about 
seven  leagues  south  of  tlie  cascades ;  it  is  conical  in  form,  rising  about 
eighteen  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  covered  with  per- 
petual snow,  at  least  12  thousand  ket  from  its  top  downwards.  Mount 
Adams  is  near  the  parallel  of  45°  north  latitude,  about  eight  leagues  north 
from  the  cascades.  About  five  hundred  feet  of  its  surface  from  its  top, 
are  covered  with  snow  perpetually.  Mount  .Tefferson  is  a  vast  and  lofty 
peak,  situated  near  latitude  42°  north  ;  it  is  also  covered  perpetually 
with  snow,  several  thousand  feet  downward,  from  its  top,  and  is  seen 
from  almost  any  part  of  ilie  southern  country.  Mount  Madison  is  near 
latitude  46*^  north ;  it  is  a  vast  massive  peak,  covered  with  snow  to  a 
very  great  depth.  Mount  Monroe  is  also  a  vastly  elevated  peak,  extend- 
ing far  into  the  snowy  region  ;  it  lies  near  latitude  43°  and  30'  north,  and 
is  seen  at  a  great  distance.  Mount  John  Q.  Adams,  situated  at  latitude 
42°  and  10'  north,  is  also  a  vast  peak,  towering  high  above  the  snow  line. 
Mount  Jackson  is  among  the  most  elevated  peaks,  and  is  surpassed  only 
by  mount  Washington;  it  is  situated  near  the  forty  second  degree  of  north 
latitude.  Mount  Van  Buren  is  a  very  high  peak,  situated  on  the  isthmus, 
between  the  Pacfic  and  Puget's  sound.  Mount  Harrison  is  also  a  very  lof-^ 
ty  peak,  terminating  in  regions  of  perpetual  snow ;  it  lies  about  forty 
miles  west  from  Puget's  sound.  Mount  Tyler,  being  vastly  elevated 
and  covered  with  snow,  is  seen  at  a  very  great  distance ;  it  lies  about 
eighty  miles  north  from  mount  Harriscin.  All  these  are  most  extrt^ordi- 
nary  conical  formations;  some  of  which  are  seen  from  every  part  of  the 
country.  Here,  wherever  you  are,  you  behold  these  ancient  pyramids 
of  eternal  ice  and  snow,  fearlessly  rearing  their  majestic  heads,  high  in 
the  ethereal  regions,  amid  the  howling  tempest,  the  flashing  lightnings, 
and  the  roaring  thunders  above  ;  presenting  their  eternal  battlements,  in 
bold  defiance  of.  the  foammg  billows,  the  raging  floods,  and  the  quak- 
ing and  volcanic  earth  below.  Enduring  monuments  of  time  !  All  this 
range  of  mountains,  is  much  less  sterile  than  those  before  described.  It 
has  numerous  elevated  plains  and  valleys,  and  extensive  depressions,  all 
of  which,  abound  with  vegetation  of  various  kinds ;  lofty  trees  of  fir, 
pine,  cedar  and  oak,  of  most  extraordinary  growth. 

Besides  the  main  ranges  of  mountains  here  described,  there  are  several 
other  smaller  ranges,  worthy  of  notice,  which  appear  to  have  very  little 
connection  with  the  main  ranges,  yet  in  some  instances,  may  be  traced  as 
spurs  of  those  ranges.  Among  tliem  is  the  Claset  range,  which 
lies  on  the  north  side  of  the  Columbia,  running  in  a  north  westerly  di- 
rection, along  the  straits  of  Juan  deFucas,  to  the  waters  of  Pugets'  sound. 
This  range  has  many  high  peaks,  a  number  of  which  rise  very  consid- 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  27 

erably  above  the  snow  line,  but  from  their  proximity  to  the  sea,  they  are 
covered  with  snow,  only  about  nine  months  of  the  year.  It  is  generally 
covered  with  dense  forests  of  fir,  pine  and  cedar  of  immense  growth. 
A  small  range  also  extends  from  the  cascades,  on  the  north  side  of  the 
Columbia,  to  cape  Disappointment  on  the  coast.  This  range  has  many 
depressions  and  elevated  plains,  and  is,  generally,  covered  with  dense  fiV 
and  pine  forests.  There  is  a  similar  range  to  that  just  described,  also  on 
the  soudi  side  of  the  Columbia,  which  commences  at  the  cascades,  and 
running  nearly  parallel  with  that  river,  terminates  near  its  mouth.  It  is 
a  continuous  succession  of  low  mountains  and  hills,  having  no  elevations 
of  more  than  about  three  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  the 
greatest  of  which,  are  near  the  cascades.  This  range  is  also  covered 
with  stately  pines  and  firs,  of  centuries  growth,  and  of  unparalleled  di- 
mensions. There  is  still  another  range,  Avhich  extends  along  the  coast, 
from  the  straits  de  Fucas,  to  Upper  California.  Its  greatest  elevations 
are  immediately  upon  the  coast,  where  they  present  high,  dark  ciifT's  of 
basaltic  rock,  which  are  seen  at  a  very  great  distance  from  the  ocean.  This 
range  descends  gradually  from  the  coast  to  the  east,  terminating  in  un- 
dulating plains.  That  portion  of  it  nearest  the  coast,  is  generally  entirely 
destitute  of  timber  or  vegetation,  and  presents  a  very  irregular,  broken 
and  stony  surface  ;  but  the  east  side  presents  those  dense  forests,  undula- 
ting plains  and  prairies,  peculiar  to  this  section  of  Oregon.  The  last 
range  which  I  shall  notice,  is  that  called  the  Klamet  range,  which  is  per- 
haps, properly  a  spur  of  the  Rocky  mountains.  It  extends  from  the 
Rocky  mountain  range,  in  latitude  42°  north,  in  a  direction  west  by 
north,  to  the  Pacific  ocean,  and  has  many  high  peaks  covered  with  snow. 
In  its  course  from  the  Rocky  mountains  to  the  Pacific,  it  is  intersected  by 
the  Blue  mountains  and  the  Cascade  or  Presidents  range.  It  is  usually 
destitute  of  timber,  and  in  many  places,  entirely  devoid  of  all  kinds  of 
vegetation. 

The  rivers  next  deserve  our  attention.  The  principal  of  these,  is  the 
Columbia,  which  is  a  grand  and  majestic  stream.  It  is  about  fifteen  hun- 
dred miles  in  length,  including  its  meanders,  entering  the  Pacific  ocean, 
at  latitude  46  degrees  north.  The  general  course  of  this  river,  from  the 
confluence  of  its  two  great  branches,  is  about  west  by  south.  Its  north- 
ern branch  takes  its  rise  in  the  Rocky  mountains,  at  latitude  50°  north, 
and  longitude  116°  west.  The  course  of  this  branch,  from  its  source  to 
McGillivarys'  pass,  at  the  base  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  is  generally, 
about  northwest.  This  pass  is  at  latitude  SS''  north,  where  those  trav- 
eling from  Oregon  to  Canada,  make  a  very  extensive  portage,  which  is  at- 
tended with  much  difficulty  and  danger.  The  river,  at  the  base  of  the 
Rocky  mountains,  is  3,600  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  its  waters 
are  urged  down  with  great  rapidity.  Here,  bearing  to  the  south,  it  runs 
but  a  few  miles,  when  it  passes  through  a  very  narrow  rocky  channel, 
which  is  called  the  Upper  dalles,  through  which,  the  waters  are  thrown 
with  such  tremendous  force,  that  they  whirl  and  dash  with  such  violence 
as  to  produce  a  most  frightful  appearance.  About  thirty  miles  below  the 
Upper  dalles,  are  the  Lower  dalles,  which  like  the  Upper  dalles,  is  a  nar- 
row channel,  walled  in  by  immense  ledges  of  rocks,  through  which  also 
the  waters  pour  with  great  force.  These  dalles,  seriously  interrupt  the 
navigation  of  the  river,  and  detract  very  much  from  the  importance  of 
the  surrounding  country.     From  the  Lower  dalles,  the  river  continues 


2S  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

the  same  course,  to  Fort  Coliville,  in  its  course  to  which  place,  it  re- 
ceives several  tributaries,  among'  which  are  Kootanie,  or  Flat-bow,  and 
the  Clarke  rivers  from  the  east,  and  that  of  Coleville  from  the  west.  In 
its  course  to  this  place,  it  also  forms  a  line  of  lakes,  two  of  which  I  will 
now  briefly  describe.  They  are  called  the  Upper  and  Lower  lakes,  the 
former  of  which,  is  about  twenty  miles  in  length,  and  about  five  in  width. 
It  is  situated  in  an  extremely  rough  and  mountainous  country,  surrounded 
by  high  towering  cliifs,  and  dense  forests  of  pines.  Between  this  and 
tlie  Lower  lakes  are  the  "  straits,"  as  they  are  called.  Here,  for  an  ex- 
tent of  about  five  miles,  the  waters  are  compressed  into  a  very  nai  row  chan- 
nel, througli  which  they  are  thrown  with  great  impetuosity.  The  Lower 
lake  is  about  twenty  five  miles  in  length,  and  six  in  Vv^idth.  It  has,  in  its 
vicinity,  forests  of  beautiful  timber,  and  limited  prairies  and  plains,  of  fer- 
tile land.  Clarkes'  or  Flat-head  river,  enters  the  Columbia  but  a  hw  miles 
above  Fort  Coleville.  It  takes  its  rise  near  the  head  waters  of  the  Mis- 
souri river.  It  is  a  large  stream,  and  has  as  much  the  appearance  of  be- 
ing the  main  river,  as  does  that  portion  which  is  called  the  Columbia. 
The  lake  Kullerspelm  is  formed  by  this  river,  in  its  course,  about  one 
hundred  miles  above  its  junction  with  the  Columbia.  This  lake  is  about 
thirty-five  miles  in  length,  and  eiglit  in  width.  The  immediate  country 
through  which  tliis  river  passes,  is  extremely  mountainous  and  sterile, 
with  the  exception  of  that  in  the  vicinity  of  the  lake,  much  of  which  is  fertile 
and  delightful.  Hootanie  or  Flat-bow  river,  also  has  its  source  in  the 
Rocky  mountains,  and  running  in  a  westerly  direction  to  the  Columbia,  it 
passes  through  a  higli  broken  region,  yet  it  passes  through  some  tolerably 
extensive  and  fertile  valleys.  lis  length,  following  its  meanders,  is  about 
three  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  a  very  small  portion  of  which,  is  naviga- 
ble, for  any  other  craft,  than  canoes  and  barges. 

From  Coleville,  the  Columbia  continues  a  westerly  course,  receiving  a 
tributary  from  the  east,  called  the  Spokan,  which  takes  its  rise  in  the  Lake 
Cauer  d' Alene,  among  the  spurs  of  the  Rocky  mountains.  This  river 
has  worn  its  way  through  a  vastly  mountainous  and  sterile  region.  Its 
banks  are  generally  high  basahic  cliffs,  covered  in  some  places,  with 
sturdy  pines  and  lofty  cedars.  In  the  surrounding  country,  are  found 
some  limited  valleys  and  plains,  many  of  which  produce  abundance  of 
vegetation,  and  are  surrounded  by  dense  forests  of  good  timber.  This 
river,  can  not  be  said  to  be  navigable,  for  any  kind  of  craft,  except  such  as 
barges  and  canoes.  The  lake  in  w^hich  it  takes  its  rise,  is  about  thirty 
miles  in  length,  and  ten  in  breadth.  There  are  some  very  fertile  plains 
and  valleys  in  the  vicinity  of  this  lake,  which  produce  an  abundance  of 
grass  and  timber,  as  well  as  a  great  variety  of  wild  fruits.  The  Colum- 
bia still  tends  westward,  about  sixty  miles  below  its  junction,  with  the 
Spokan,  to  its  conflux  with  the  Okanagan,  above  which  point,  it  receives 
several  small  tributaries.  The  Okanagan  takes  its  rise  in  a  line  of  lakes 
of  the  same  name,  which  are  situated  in  the  mountains,  about  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  miles  from  its  mouth.  These  lakes  are  all  navigable  to 
considerable  extent,  for  canoes,  barges  and  boats.  The  country  through 
which  this  river  passes,  is  usually  extremely  sterile,  with  the  exception  of 
a  very  few  small  plains  which  are  covered  with  vegetation,  and  a  few  hills, 
which  are  thinly  timbered.  From  the  mouth  of  the  Okanagan,  to  Fort 
Wallawalla,  the  course  of  the  Columbia,  is  about  south  southwest.  In 
this  distance  it  receives  the  Y' Akama,  the  Piscous,  and  the  Entyatecoom, 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  39 

from  the  west ;  all  of  which  take  their  sources  in  the  Cascade  rang-e. 
Within  the  above  distance  also,  it  receives  the  great  Saptin,  or  Lewis' 
river  from  the  east,  which  flows  into  Columbia  at  latitude  4(i^  and  8' 
north.  This  great  tributary  of  the  Columbia,  has  its  source  in  the  Rocky 
mountains,  near  latitude  42*^  north.  Its  general  course  is  about  north 
west,  and  its  length  is  about  five  hundred  miles,  following  its  meanders. 
It  lies  between  the  Rocky  and  the  Blue  mountains,  dividing  the  one  from 
the  other,  by  its  extensive  valleys.  It  is  navigable  only  for  canoes  and 
barges,  and  for  them  only  between  its  various  rapids  and  falls,  which  arc 
very  numerons.  It  winds  its  tortuous  way  alternately  through  high  i-w- 
pendicular  cliffs,  sterile  mountains,  limited,  yet  fertile  valleys,  barren  hiljs 
and  plains.  In  its  course  it  receives  the  Kooskooske  river  from  the  east,  and 
the  Salmon  river  from  the  west.  The  Kooskooske  rises  in  the  Rocky  moun- 
tains, near  latitude  46"^  north,  and  is  navigable  only  for  canoes  and  boats,  for 
a  very  short  distance.  The  Salmon  river  takes  its  rise  in  the  Blue  moun- 
tains ;  it  is  not  navigable  even  for  canoes,  but  is  a  very  beautiful  little  stream. 
At  Fort  Wallawalla,  the  Columbia  is  about  1280  fett  above  the  level  of  the 
sea,  and  about  200  rods  wide.  Near  this  place,  it  receives  the  Wallawalla 
river,from  the  south;  asmall  stream,  which  is  not  navigable,  nor  is  it  of  any 
particular  importance  for  any  purpose  other,  than  to  water  the  country 
through  which  it  passes  ;  it  is,  however,  a  very  beautiful  stream.  The 
course  of  the  Columbia  from  Fort  Wallawalla,  is  very  nearly  due  west. 
Between  Wallawalla  and  the  dalles,  it  receives  the  Umatilla,  Quisnels', 
John  Day's,  and  de' Chutes  rivers,  from  the  south,  and  Cathlatates  from  the 
north.  Neither  of  the  last  mentioned  streams  is  navigable,  yet  they  all 
water  some  very  rich  and  productive,  but  small  valleys.  About  eighty 
miles  below  Fort  Vv^allawalla,  the  Columbia  is  much  interrupted  in  its 
course,  by  rapids,  falls  and  cascades.  The  first  fall  of  importance,  is  that 
about  ten  miles  above  thagl^lles,  where  the  water  falls  about  fifty  feet  per- 
pendicular, over  vast  ledges  of  rocks,  down  which  it  leaps  and  whirls 
with  thunder's  roar ;  then  rushing,  thundering  and  foaming  through  a 
deep  narrow  channel,  formed  by  high  ledges  of  massive  rocks,  it  winds 
its  noisy,  tortuous  way  onAvard  to  the  dalles;  pouring  its  mighty  volumes 
over  cliffs,  into  cavern,  after  cavern,  and  trench,  after  trench,  with  such 
tremendous  force,  as  to  cause  the  very  earth  to  groan  and  quake. 

The  dalles,  is  a  name  applied  to  an  elevated  section  of  country,  of  about 
ten  miles  in  extent,  of  solid  dark  rock,  rising  in  irregular,  high  cliffs, 
hills  and  mountains,  which  have  braved  tl^  fury  of  this  great  river  for 
ages  past ;  but  have  finally  giten  way  to  ks  repeated  assaults.  Stratum, 
after  stratum,  has  given  way,  until  it  has  worn  a  deep,  frightful,  cavern- 
ous channel,  the  walls  of  which  are  solid  rock,  from  fifty  to  four  hundred 
feet  in  height.  Into  this  deep,  narrow  channel,  are  all  the  waters  of  the 
great  Columbia  compressed ;  but  averse  to  confinement,  they  force  their 
way  through  these  narrow  defiles,  with  the  velocity  of  lightning,  and  the 
roar  of  thunder.  The  course  of  the  river  is  not  materially  varied  by 
these  repeated  interruptions,  nor  is  its  navigation  entirely  destroyed.  Pro- 
visions and  merchandise  are  annually  transported,  in  great  quantities,  by 
the  Hudson's  BayCompany,  from  Fort  Vancouver  to  all  the  interior  forts, 
which  is  effected  by  repeated  portages.  The  last  and  most  formidable 
obstruction  to  its  navigation,  are  the  cascades,  at  the  base  of  the  Cascade 
mountains,  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  from  the  ocean.  From 
the  dalles  to  the  cascades,  the  Columbia  pursues  its  onward,  noisy  course, 


30  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

and  forcing  its  way  through  the  vast,  massive,  solid  rocks  of  the  elevated 
cascade  range,  it  pours  its  immense  volumes  down  the  rocky  declivity, 
four  hundred  feet  perpendicular.  The  roar  of  this  unparalleled  cataract, 
is  heard  at  a  great  distance,  and  to  those  who  are  near  it  is  almost  deafen- 
ing. The  volume  of  water  and  its  fall  are  so  great,  that  its  whole  bed, 
dashes  and  thunders  down,  with  such  fury,  as  to  make  the  very  earth 
quake  and  tremble,  with  such  violence,  as  to  cause  you  very  much  to 
doubt  the  permanency  of  that  upon  which  you  stand.  From  the  cascades 
to  Fort  Vancouver,  a  distance  of  about  thirty  miles,  the  river  assumes  a 
much  milder  character,  and  spreads,  and  extends  its  water,  to  a  much 
greater  extent.  At  Fort  Vancouver,  which  is  ninety  miles  from  the 
coast,  it  is  three  hundred  and  sixty  rods  wide,  and  of  great  depth.  Be- 
tween the  fort  and  its  mouth  it  receives  the  Wallammette  from  the  south, 
and  the  Cawlity  from  the  north,  both  of  which,  aid  much  in  increasing 
the  volume  of  its  waters.  From  its  mouth  to  the  cascades,  it  is  a  beauti- 
ful, and  grand  stream,  and  is  navigable  to  that  extent,  at  the  lowest  stage 
of  water,  for  ships  drawing  two  fathoms.  It  enters  the  ocean  between 
mount  Adams  and  cape  Disappointment,  where  several  sand  bars  are 
formed,  which  are  a  great  and  dangerous  obstruction  to  its  navigation, 
and  which  render  it  extremely  difficult  and  hazardous  of  entrance. 

The  Wallarnmette  rises  in  the  Cascade  mountains,  near  latitude  41*^ 
north  ;  its  course  is  generally  noith,  northwest,  to  its  mouth,  where  it  enters 
the  Columbia  river  at  two  distinct  points,  and  thus  forms  a  large  triangu- 
lar islandj  called  the  Wappato  island.  The  upper  mouth  of  the  Wallam- 
mette, is  about  five  miles  below  Fort  Vancouver,  and  the  lower  month  is 
about  tv/enty  miles  below  that  place ;  which  shows  the  extent  of  the  Wappato 
island,  to  be  fifteen  miles  on  the  Columbia.  The  Wallammette  receives 
the  Klackamus  and  the  Putin  rivers  from  the  east,  and  the  Fualitine 
and  the  Yam-hill  rivers  from  the  west.  Bea^jjis  these  rivers,  it  also  re- 
ceives numerous  less  important  tributaries,  both  from  the  east  and  the  west. 
The  Wallammette  is  navigable  for  vessels  of  a  light  draught,  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Klackamus,  which  is  about  twenty  miles  from  its  conflux 
with  the  Columbia.  Here,  its  navigation  is  seriously  obstructed  by  rapids 
and  sand  bars,  the  latter  of  which,  are  formed  by  the  waters  of  the 
Klackamus,  which  annually  wash  down  immense  quantities  of  sand, 
and  which  are  deposited  at  the  junction  of  the  two  rivers.  The  falls, 
which  are  a  few  miles  above  the  mouth  of  the  Klackamus,  are  a  fur- 
ther, and  more  serious  obstruc^on  to  its  navigation.  Here,  its  vast  volume 
of  water,  is  poured  precipitat"y  down  a  ledge  of  rocks,  of  about  thirty 
feet  perpendicular;  and  although  this  fearful  cataract,  forms  a  great  ob- 
struction to  its  safe  navigation,  yet  it  is  highly  important,  as  it  affords  an 
almost  inexhaustible  water  power.  Above  the  falls,  the  Wallammette  is 
again  navigable,  for  vessels  and  steam-boats  oC  :'ght  draught,  for  one 
hundred  miles,  or  perhaps  more,  wkh  little  or  ao  obstruction.  This 
river  and  its  tributaries,  water  one  of  the  most  fertile  and  delightful  re- 
gions in  all  Oregon.  From  its  source  to  its  mouth,  a  distance  of  about 
three  hundred  miles,  it  passes  alternately  through  high  mountains  and 
hills,  undulating,  rich  plains,  and  fertile  and  beautiful  valleys.  The 
Klackamus  takes  its  rise  in  the  Cascade  mountains,  near  latitude  43  de- 
grees north.  It  is  a  very  rapid  stream,  and  is  navigable  only  for  boats 
and  barges  of  light  draught,  and  for  those  only  during  high  water.  The 
Fualitine  river  enters  the  Wallammette  about  a  mile  above  the  falls ;  it 


TO    OREGON   AND    CALIFORNIA.  31 

takes  its  rise,in  the  elevated  and  mountainous  regions  near  the  coast,  and 
is  about  one  hundred  miles  in  length,  a  greater  part  of  which  distance,  it 
is  navigable  for  boats,  barges,  and  steam-boats  of  light  draught,  a  greater 
part  of  the  year.  The  Yam-hill  empties  into  the  Wallammette  about 
twenty  miles  above  the  falls  ;  it  also  has  its  source  in  the  mountainous  re- 
gion near  the  ocean,  and  is  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  long. 
About  one  half  of  its  length,  is  navigable,  perhaps,  two  thirds  of  the 
year,  for  boats,  pirogues  and  the  like  crafts.  The  Putin  'river  empties 
into  the  Wallammette,  about  twelve  miles  above  the  falls,  after  having 
wound  its  tortuous  course,  about  one  hundred  miles  from  its  source, 
which  is  in  the  Cascade  range,  near  latitude  44  degrees  north.  Thi? 
stream  is  navigable  only  a  small  portion  of  the  year,  and  then  only  for 
small  crafts  of  very  light  draught.  The  Cawlitz  is  a  beautiful  little 
stream,  which  enters  the  Columbia  below  the  Wappato  island ;  it  can 
not  be  said  to  be  navigable,  for  any  kind  of  crafts,  only  during  high  wa- 
ter, and  even  then,  only  for  those  of  the  lightest  draught;  though  it  is 
highly  important,  as  it  waters  a  large  extent  of  country,  which  is  well 
adapted  to  grazing  purposes.  I  will  give  no  further  description  of  the 
tributaries  of  the  Columbia,,  as  most  of  them  have  already  been  partially 
described,  in  the  description  of  that  river;  but  I  shall  proceed  to  give 
a  brief  description,  of  those  which  lie  north,  and  soiath,  of  that  great 
river. 

The  largest  and  most  important  river  north  of  the  Columbia,  is  Fra- 
sier's  river,  which  rises  in  the  Rocky  mountains,  near  latitude  55  degrees 
north.  Its  general  course  is  about  north  by  west,  a  distance  of  seventy 
or  eighty  miles,  when  it  changes  to  south  southwest,  which  course  it  con- 
tinues, to  the  parallel  of  49  degrees  of  north  latitude,  at  the  Cascade 
mountains.  In  its  course  to  this  place,  it  receives  Stevrart's  river,  which 
takes  its  rise  in  a  chain^s©^  lakes,  near  latitude  55  degrees  north,  then  pass- 
ing through  a  sterile  mountainous  region,  it  receives  the  Chilcotin  and 
Pinksliisa  from  the  west,  and  the  Thompson's  and  Quesnells'  rivers  from 
[he  east.  The  last  mentioned  rivers  water  an  extremely  broken  and 
mountainous  country,  yet  they  are  said  to  be  navigable  to  some  extent, 
though  with  repeated  interruptions,  which  arise  from  their  numerous  falls, 
rapids  and  cascades.  Frasier's  river  cuts  its  way  through  the  Cascade 
range,  and  thundering  down  cataracts,  and  over  falls 'and  rapids,  it  pur- 
sues a  westerly  course,  to  the  gulf  of  Georgia,  near  latitude  49  degrees 
and  7  min.  north,  where  it  finally  empties,  its  vast  floods  of  water  into 
that  great  gulf.  The  whole  length  of  tms  river  is  about  three  hundred 
and  sixty  miles,  but  a  small  portion  of  which  i^  navigable.  That  portion 
of  it,  above  the  Cascade  range,  is  navigable  only  for  canoes,  boats  and 
the  like,  and  for  those  only  during  high  water,  and  even  then,  with  nu- 
merous obstructions;  but  that  portion  below  the  Cascade  range,  a  distance 
of  about  eighty  miles,  is  navigable  without  interruption,  for  vessels  of  two 
fathoms  draught.  No  obstruction  whatever,  is  found  any  where  in  this 
portion,  except  a  bar  which  is  found  at  its  mouth,  and  which,  is  a  serious 
obstruction  to  those  unacquainted  with  its  entrance.  The  country  through 
which  this  stream  lies,  is.  with  some  exceptions,  rough,  mountainous  and 
sterile ;  studded  occasionally  with  those  lofty  pines  of  ages,  and  towering, 
icy  monuments  of  time  !  I  shall  notice  but  one  other  river  lying,  north  of 
the  Columbia,  which  is  the  Chilkeelis,  and  which  heads  in  the  mountain- 
ous region  north  of  the  Columbia,  by  three  distinct  heads.     Receiving 


32  THE   EMIGRANTS^    GUIDE 

several  other  streams,  which  have  their  sources  in  the  mountainous  re- 
gion, near  the  head  of  Pugets'  sound,  it  runs  westward,  pursuing  a  wind- 
ing and  circuitous  course,  through  elevated  plains  and  high  mountains, 
forming  numerous  fails,  and  rapids,  and  finally,  empties  into  Gray's  har- 
bor. This  river  waters  one  of  the  most  barren  and  broken  regions  in  all 
Oregon ;  it  is  navigable  only  for  boats  of  light  draught,  between  its  nu- 
merous cataracts  and  rapids. 

There  are  several  other  rivers  on  the  north  side  of  the  Columbia, 
which  however,  are  unimportant.  I  shall,  therefore,  proceed  to  the 
description  of  those  on  the  south  side  of  that  river.  Besides  the  tributa- 
ries of  the  Columbia,  there  are  but  three  rivers  on  the  south  side  of  that 
river,  which  deserve  particular  attention.  The  first  which  i  shall  notice, 
is  the  Umpqua,  which  rises  in  the  Cascade  mountains,  near  latitude  43  deg. 
north,  pursuing  a  w^esterly  course,  it  enters  the  ocean  at  latitude  43  deg. 
30  min.  north.  It  is  generally  about  a  half  of  a  mile  wide,  and  is  con- 
fined, in  many  places,  within  high  banks  of  basaltic  rock.  Having  a 
very  large  bar  at  its  mouth,  the  entrance  is  very  difficult,  and  the  harbor 
very  unsafe.  The  water  upon  this  bar  is  about  two  fathoms  deep,  yet 
the  channel  is  subject  to  such  sudden  changes,  that  at  times,  it  is  with  the 
greatest  difficulty  it  can  be  found.  The  tide  flows  up  this  stream,  about 
forty  miles  from  its  mouth,  which  would  aid  in  its  navigation,  very  much 
to  that  extent,  were  it  not  for  the  vast  bar  at  its  entrance.  The  country 
through  which  this  stream  passes,  is,  generally,  broken  and  hilly,  but  in 
many  places,  there  are  valleys  and  undulating  plains,  which  are  very 
rich,  and  of  very  considerable  extent.  With  the  exception  of  the  valleys 
and  plains,  it  is  usually  covered  with  thick  forests  of  lofty  pines,  firs  and 
oaks.  This  stream  is  perhaps,  navigable  for  steam -boats,  about  forty 
miles  from  its  mouth,  beyond  which,  its  navigation  is  repeatedly  inter- 
rupted, by  falls  and  rapids,  j^et  it  is  navigable  still  above,  for  boats  and 
barges  to  considerable  extent.  The  river  lying  next  south  of  the  Ump- 
qua, is  the  Rogue's  river,  which  has  its  source  in  the  Klamet  and  Cascade 
ranges,  near  latitude  42  deg.  north.  It  pursues  a  course  about  west  by 
north,  winding  its  way  through  alternate  sterile  mountains,  high  hills, 
rich,  fertile  valleys,  and  beautiful  plains,  and  finally,  empties  into  the 
ocean,  at  the  parallel  of  43  deg.  north  latitude.  The  entrance  of  this 
river,  is  also  much  obstructed  by  a  vast  sand  bar,  at  its  mouth,  which  is 
entirely  impassable,  the  greater  part  of  the  year.  This  river  is  about  the 
same  width  of  the  Umpqua ;  its  current  is  very  rapid,  and  it  has  numer- 
ous falls  and  rapids,  which  muJch  obstruct  its  navigation,  even  for  boats 
and  canoes.  Its  bed  is  generally  about  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  below  the 
surface  of  the  earth,  hence  its  waters  are  very  difficult  of  access.  It  is 
navigable, perhaps,  about  eighty  miles,  for  boats  and  canoes.  The  coun- 
try through  which  it  passes,  is  usually,  very  well  timbered,well  watered, 
and  much  of  it  is  very  rich  and  productive. 

The  only  river  which  remains  to  be  noticed,  is  the  Klamet,  which  rises 
in  the  Klamet  range,  near  latitude  41  deg.  north,  whence  it  runs  a  north- 
west course,  about  ninety  miles,  where  it  changes  its  course  to  west,  and 
pursues  a  very  serpentine  course  for  many  miles,  when,  finally,  it  runs 
about  west  by  north,  to  the  ocean,  where  it  empties,  near  latitude  41  deg. 
40  min.  north,  in  California.  This  river  waters  the  most  barren  and 
mountainous  portion  of  country,  in  the  southern  part  of  Oregon.  With 
the  exception  of  a  few  small  valleys  and  plains,  it  is  everywhere  walled 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  33 

in,  with  high  mountains  and  clifls  of  solid  roclc,  most  of  which,  are  en- 
tirely dcstitnto  of  limber.  But  a  very  small  portion  of  this  stream,  is 
navigable  for  any  crafts  larger  than  canoes  and  bonis ;  but  that  portion  of  it 
near  its  mouth,  is,per]iaps,  navigable  for  steam-boats,  a  distance  of  thirty 
or  forty  miles,  without  serious  obstruction.  As  is  the  caso,  with  all  those 
streams  emptying  into  the  Pacific,  it  has  an  extensive  bar  at  its  mouth, 
which  entirely  prevents  the  safe  entry  of  vessels,  although  there  is  a  suf- 
ficient depth  of  water.  All  those  rivers  putting  into  the  Pacific,  south  of 
the  Columbia,  have  from  two  to  eight  fathoms  of  water  upon  their  bars; 
but  it  is  hazardous  in  the  extreme,  for  a  vessel  to  attempt  an  entrance,  at 
many  seasons  of  the  year,  becaust^  of  th(^  tremendous  surf,  that  sets  in 
from  the  ocean ;  and  the  (Wtremc;  narrowness,  and  variableness  of  their 
chann(>ls. 

Ail  the  variotis  rivers  of  (Oregon,  are  subj(>ct  to  extraordinary  rises 
and  overflows,  which  take  place,  in  those  heading  in  the  diflerent  ranges 
of  mountains,  at  difll'rcnt  S(\asons  of  the  year.  In  those  which  rise  in  the 
Cascade  range,  the  rise  takes  place  in  November  and  February,  annually. 
These  ris(S  are  produced  by  the  great  (juaniities  of  rain,  which  fall  in 
those  regions,  of  which,  more  will  be  said,  upon  a  subse(|uent  page,  'i'he 
rise  of  those  rivers  having  their  sources  in  the  jjlue  and  Rocky  moun- 
tains, is, generally,  in  the  months  of  May  and  June,  of  each  year;  it  is 
0(T;;isioned  by  the  melting  of  the  snows  of  those  mountains.  The  rise  in 
all  these  streanis  is  very  ixreat,  especially  in  tliose.  having  their  sources 
in  the  Cascade  range.  The  Culumbia  tisually  rises  from  ten  to  fifteen 
feet,  and  of  course,  inundates  much  of  the  surroundinu'.  low  councry.  The 
Wallamette  frequentlj-  rises  from  tW(Mity  to  twenly-fiv(>  feet  perpendicu- 
lar, and  thus,  submergi^s  large  sections  of  the  adjacent  country,  and  occa- 
sions very  great  damage.  Such  is  also  the  case  witii  tlie  Cawlit/,  Umpqua 
and  Rogue's  rivers;  and  in  fact,  all  those  rivers  which  are  in  the  vicinity 
ol  the  low  lands.  There  is  also  a  rise  in  the  Wallammctte  and  the  Cavv- 
litz,  which  is  occasioned  by  the  bacK'ina'  of  th(Mr  waters,  during  the  rise 
in  thi^,  Columbia.  The  rise  in  the  rivers  heading  in  the  Cascade  range, 
is,  generally,  very  sudden,  but  that  in  the  Columbia,  and  other  rivers 
\x-hich  have  their  sources  in  the  l^ocky  mountains,  is  usually,  gradual, 
unless  tiiere  happ(>ns  to  be  very  h(>;!vy  rain?  in  the  interior,  about  the 
time  of  their  annual  rise,  which  is  not  i;-enerally  the  case,  though  it  some- 
times happ(>ns,  and  when  it  does  occur,  the  country  is  submerged  to  a 
great  extent;  both  man  and  beast  are  dri vein  to  the  hills  and  mountains 
for  their  safety,  and  irrpparable  losses  are  frequently  sustained. 
5 


34  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

CHAPTER  IV. 

A  DESCRIPTION  OF  OEEGON. 

DescTiptmn  of  the  idamls;   Vancmcvier's  island;  Quern  Charlotte's  island^ 
Archipelago  of  islands;  Prince  Royars  island.      The  harbors;  general 


y..,sairilyof.     Barg  at  the  mouths  of  the  ricers;  changing  of     Gray's 
harbor.     The  harbor  of  Juan  dc  Facas;  those   of  the  various  islands. 


Harbors  s<nith  of  the  Columbia.  No  good  harbors  south  of  the  straits 
Juan  d^  Fui-as,  and  gulf  (f  Georgia.  The  surface  of  theEastern  section  ; 
southern  part  of  J  'alley  of  Bear  ricer.  Destined  "routes  of  Ores-on  and 
tahforma  eninjrau's.  Soda  spring;  description  of  Conical  elevations; 
description  of  '■Steam-boat  spri/ig;^^  description  of.  Volcanic  apppar- 
ances.  Hot  springs,  Ultin7a!r  importance  oj  Bear  river  valley.  Valleys 
near  Port  Hall;  tho.vi  near  Fort  Boisia.  The  ''Lone  tree?^  The  "  Grand 
ToundP  Surface  of  the  Middle  section.  Valleys  of  the  Wallau-alla, 
John  Days  and  Umalit<i  ri<-rrs  Snrfaceof  the  Western  section;  northern 
pari  of;  southern  part  nf  \  \  '(dlamm.etta  caUcy.  Fuatitine  plains.  Valleijs 
upon  the  Iwpqua;  ujxm.  Rogue's  river;  7tpon  the  Kkimet.  Soil  of  the 
emtern  section;  its  prt-vaiUng  rock;  its  agricultural  and  grazing  propcr- 
iLon.s\  Soil  of  the  Middle  section;  its  principal  rock;  its  agricultural  and 
grazwg  adaptation.  S<nt  of  thn  Western  section;  variety  of  its  rock;  its 
grazing  and  agricnltund  capabilities.     Ackersc  opinion. 

There  are  several  islands  adjacent  to  the  main  land,  which  now  de- 
serve our  attention.  Tiie  most  important  of  these,  is  Vancouver's  island, 
which  )3  two  hundred  and  sixty  miles  in  lengthy  and  fifty  in  width,  and 
like  the  mam  land  in  its  vicinity,  its  surface  is  broken  and  mountainous. 
yet  It  has  some  plains  and  valleys,  of  considerable  extent  and  fertility. 
An  abundance  of  good  fresh  water  is  produced  by  its  numerous  springs 
and  streams,  which  rise  in  ita  interior  ;  and  it  is  g-enerally  well  timbered, 
and  in  all  respects  well  adapted  to  grazing  and  agricukural  purposes. 
»V  ash  mgton,  or  aueen  Charlotte's  island  is  about  one  hundred  and  fifty 
miles  m  length,  andthirty  in  width.  It  is  quite  similar  to  Yancover's 
island,  in  its  adaptation  to  grazing  and  agricidtural  purposes,  and  it  has 
also  an  abundance  of  good  fresh  Avater,  M'hich  is  produced  from  its 
numerous  springs  and  rivulets  rising  in  its  interior.  Its  surface  is  also 
broiien  and  hilly,  having  however,  many  ^mall  valleys  and  plains,  which 
are  very  rich,  and  which tibound  with  good  timberfit,  like  Vancover's 
island,  IS  well  adapted  to  the  support  of  a  small  community.  Besides 
these,  there  is  also  an  archipelago  of  islands,  near  the  southern  extremity 
ot  Vancouver's  island.  The  surface  of  these  islands.is,  generally,  much 
broken,  and  they  are  much  less  fertile, than  those  just  described.  They 
generally,  have  a  suffjciency  of  timber,  but  an  insufficiency  of  fresh  wa- 
ter, which  IS,  no  doubt,  the  cause  of  their  being  uninhabited.  There  are 
a  few  other  islands  also, near  the  main  land,  which  are  called  the  Prince 
Royal  islands,  and  which  are  uninhabited,  and  in  all  other  respects,  Guite 
similar  to  l hose  last  described,  'j^he  first  two  above  described,  are  as 
thickly  inhabited  as  the  main  land,  by  various  tribes  of  Indians,  who  re- 
soit  to  them,  m  large  numbers,  for  the  purpose  of  hunting  and  fishing. 

Very  (cw  safe  harbors  are  found  in  all  Oregon.  As  has  been  else- 
where remarked,  all  the  various  rivers,  wliich  empty  into  the  ocean,  have 
extensive  sand  bars  at  their  mouths,  which  reader  them  extremel/  diffi- 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  35 

cult,  and  dang-erous   of  entrance.     These   bars  arc  formed  by  the  im- 
mense quantities  of  sand,  which  are   brought  down  by  the  water,  during 
the  annual  overflows,  and  which,  are  thrown  back  into  the  mouths  by  the 
lashing  surf.  Thus,  the  waters  of  the  rivers,pressing  upon  the  one  side,  and 
the  surf  upon  the  other,  the  sands  are  formed  into  bars,  which  so  much 
interrupt   the  navigation  of  all  those  otherwise  navigable,  and  important 
streams.     Permanent  bars,  are  not  however,  thus  formed ;  the  constant 
action  of  the  water,  having  a  tendency  to  confine  the  sand  within  indefi- 
nite limits,  but  not  to  render  it  permanent.     Hence  it  is,  that  the  bars  are 
constantly  changing  their  positions,  from  side  to  side,  which  renders  the 
entrance  into  all  those  rivers,  the  more  difficult  and  dangerous.     The  pi- 
lot who  well  understands  the  cliannel   this  year,  knows  nothing  of  it  the 
next.     Entrance  or  departure,  through  many  of  these  channels,  is  entirely 
impracticable,  the   greater  part  of  the  year.     These  bars   are  not  only 
changing  their  positions,  but  tliey  are  constantly  increasing  ;  yet  the  fact 
that  the  depth  of  the  water  upon  them,  has  never  been  known  to  diminish, 
induces  the  belief,  that  notwithstanding  the  changes,  and  increase  of 
the  sands,  they  will  never  afford  any  greater  obstruction  to  the  naviga- 
tion, than  they  do  at  present.     Gray's  harbour  is  considered  very  safe, 
when  entered,  but  vessels  only  of  a  small  class  can  enter  it,  there  being 
but  about  ten  feet  of  water  at  the  entrance ,  and  the  anchorage  whicli  it 
affords  although  safe,  is  very  limited.     The  northern  part  of  Oregon  af- 
fords  many  extensive   and  safe   harbours,  the   principal   of  which,  are 
those  of  the  straits  Juan  de  Fucas.     Many  of  these  harbour  are  very  ex- 
tensive, and  entirely  secure,  and  are  capable  of  receiving  any  class  of 
vessels.     They  are,  no  doubt,  ample  for  all  the  commercial  purposes  of 
northern  Oregon,  but  that  portion  is  the  least  fertile,  and  the  least  valuable 
part  of  all  that  country,  consequently,  commercial  advantages,  in  that  sec- 
tion of  the  country,  are  of  much  less  importance.     Much  of  that  part  of 
the  coast  north  of  latitude  49°  north,  is  cut  and  intersected,  in  almost 
every  direction,  by  innumerable  deep  inlets,  which  have  high  perpendic- 
ular walls,  of  solid  rock,  but  whicli,  afford  no  anchorage  or  harbors.     But 
the  sterility  and  roughness  of  that  portion  of  the  country  are  such,  that 
harbors  there,  would  be  of  little  or  no  importance.     Some  of  the  islands 
of  which  I  have  spoken,  have  a  few  very  good  harbors,  but  they  are  very 
limited  in  extent  of  anchorage.     Vancover's  island  affords  the  best,  but 
Queen  Charlotte's  island  affords  some  very  good  ones,  so  also  do  several 
others  of  the  larger  islands.     South  of  the  Columbia,  there  are  but  two 
harbors,  of  any  importance  which    are  found  at  the  mouth  of  the  Ump- 
qua  and  Rogues  rivers,  and  which  have  vast  sand  bars  at  their  entrances, 
that  render  ingress  and  egress,  not  only  very  difficult,  but  extremely  haz- 
ardous.    A  further  and  more  serious  objection,  to  all  those  harbors  formed 
by  the  rivers,  is,  that  after  an  entrance  is  effected,  the  anchorage  is  en- 
tirely insecure,  owing  to  the  exposure  of  vessels,  to  the  winds,  and  surf 
of  the  ocean,  to  which  they  are  dangerously  exposed,  everywhere  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  mouths  of  alt  these  rivers.     There  is  not,  in  fact,  a  good, 
convenient,  or  safe  harbor,  on  all  the  coast  of  Oregon,  south  of  the  straits 
of  Juan  de  Fucas,  and  the  gulf  of  Georgia. 

A  more  particular  description  of  the  face  of  the  country  will  now,  be 
given.  In  giving  this  description,  I  commence  with  the  Eastern  section, 
or  that  section  which  lies  between  the  Rocky,  and  Blue  mountains.  It  is 
miich  diversified  in  surface,  as  it  is  intersected  in  almost  every  direction. 


36  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

by  innumerable  spurs  of  the  Rocky  and  Blue  mountains.  Very  little 
level  land  is  to  be  found,  in  any  portion  of  this  section,  but  many  exten- 
sive, broken  and  hilly  prairies,  are  found,  which  are  entirely  sterile, 
producing  neither  grass  nor  timber ;  the  only  vegetation  seen  being  the 
prickly-pear  and  the  wild  wormwood,  or  artemisia.  The  only  vegetation 
which  is  found  in  any  part  of  this  section,  is  in  the  vicinity  of  the  streams, 
with  occasional  patches  of  "  bunch  grass  "  off  the  streams.  Persons  in 
traveling  through  this  section,  are  under  the  necessity  of  traveling  a  cer- 
tain number  of  hours  each  day,  and  at  a  certain  rate  of  speed,  in  order  to 
reach  tliose  places,  where  water  and  grass  may  be  found,  for  the  suste- 
nance of  themselves  and  their  horses.  Notwithstanding  the  general  sterility, 
of  this  section,  it  has  some  tolerably,  and  some  very  rich  valleys  and 
plains,  all  of  which,  however,  are  extremely  limited  in  their  extent.  The 
first  of  tliem,  which  I  shall  notice,  is  the  valley  of  the  great  Bear  river. 
Tiie  river  upon  which  this  valley  lies,  is  of  considerable  importance  ;  ri- 
sing east  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  it  runs  through  the  great  southern 
pass,  at  latitude  42°  north,  and  empties  into  the  great  Salt  lake, 
or  lake  Timpanagos,  in  Upper  California.  The  valley  of  this  river,  lies 
principally  in  California  also,  but  my  present  purpose  is  to  describe  that 
portion  only  of  it,  which  lies  in  Oregon.  Much  of  this  valley  is  very 
rich,  producing  vegetation  in  great  abundance,  but  its  principal  importance, 
consists  in  its  peculiar  local  situation.  It  is  through  this  valley,  that  the 
route  from  the  United  States  to  Oregon  and  California,  is  destined  forever 
to  pass.  Being  the  most  eligible,  and  in  fact,  the  only  practical  wagon 
route,  that  has,  as  yet,  been  discovered  by  which,  the  emigrant  may  travel 
with  ease  and  comfort;  it  is  destined,  beyond  any  doubt,  to  become  the 
great  thoroughfare  to  all  the  western  country.  When  we  reflect  that 
even  now,  hundreds  and  thousands  of  our  citizens  are  annually  passing 
by  that  route  down  this  valley,  we  can  not  fail  to  arrive  at  the  conclusion, 
that  this  must  soon  become  a  vastly,  important  region.  At  some  point  in 
this  valley,  will  be  found  the  most  favorable  point,  on  the  whole  route 
from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  for  the  emigrant  to  encamp  for  a  few 
days,  in  order  to  acquire  that  relaxation  and  repose,  which  he  so  much 
needs,  after  his  long  and  fatiguing  journey,  as  well  as  to  obtain  supplies, 
and  to  refit,  for  the  residue  of  his  toilsome  expedition.  But  this  is  not  the 
only  importance,  attached  to  this  peculiar  section  of  country.  In 
this  valley,  are  found  the  soda  springs,  the  "  steam -boat  springs,"  and  nu- 
merous other  wonderous  objects,  which  are  well  calculated  to  attract  the 
attention  of  the  curious,  and  the  admirer  of  nature. 

The  soda  springs  are  situated  about  one  hundred  miles  west  of  the  di- 
viding ridge,  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  about  fifty  miles  east  of  Fort 
Hall,  within  twenty  rods  of  Bear  river,  on  its  north  side,  and  near  lati- 
tude 42°  north.  They  are  in  the  midst  of  a  beautiful  grove  of  small  ce- 
dars, and  surrounded  by  rich  valleys  and  plains,  high,  rolling  hills,  and 
volcanic  vales  and  mountains.  Upon  approaching  within  their  vicinity, 
you  are  struck  at  once,  with  the  extraordinary  appearance  which  they 
present,  as  well  as  the  hissing  noises  which  they  produce,  occasioned  by 
the  perpetual  effervescence  of  their  bubbling,  noisy  waters.  There  are 
six  of  these,  which  are  from  five  to  ten  feet  in  diameter ;  the  waters  of 
which,  are  from  two  to  three  feet,  below  the  surface  of  the  earth.  Their 
waters  are  perfectly  clear,  and  very  delicious  to  the  taste,  and  in  all  re- 
spects, like  the  water  obtained  at  our  common  soda  fountains  in  civilised 


TO    OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  37 

life.  When  dipping  the  water  from  the  springs,  the  effervescence  is  still 
going  on  in  your  cup,  until  you  place  it  to  your  lips,  when,  if  you  can 
withstand  its  suffocating  fumes,  you  have  a  most  delicious  draught.  In 
the  vicinity  of  these  springs,  there  are  also,  several  other  soda  springs, 
which,  however,  are  much  less  important,  than  those  just  described. 
Near  them  also,  are  several  very  singular  conical  elevations,  ahoui  five  or 
six  feet  in  height,  in  the  apex  of  each  of  which,  is  an  aperture,  of  about 
six  inches  in  diameter,  from  which  the  water  gushes  out,  and  running 
down  the  sides  of  these  cones,  it  leaves  upon  them  a  sediment,  which  is 
thrown  up  by  the  water,  and  which  has,  no  doubt,  in  the  process  of  time, 
produced  these  extraordinary  conical  formations,  which  now  much  more 
resemble  the  work  of  art,  than  that  ol  nature.  These  singular  evomitions 
of  water  and  sediment,  are  produced  by  the  escape  of  great  quantities 
of  gas,  generated  by  the  evolving  waters  in  the^  subterraneous  caverns  be- 
low. The  ceaseless  commotion  of  the  waters,  in  those  vast  reservoirs, 
produce  a  constant  rumbling  and  gurgling  sound,  which  is  distinctly 
heard  a  distance  of  several  rods  from  the  springs,  and  the  emition  of  gas, 
produces  a  kind  of  puffing,  and  blowing  sound,  which  is  also  heard  sev- 
eral rods.  About  one  hundred  rods  below  these  springs,  is  the  "steam 
boat  spring,"  as  it  is  called,  which  discharges  v,'ater  and  gas  in  the  same 
manner,  as  those  just  described,  but  in  much  greater  quantities,  and  with 
a  report  quite  similar  to  that  produced  by  the  emition  of  steam  from  tlie 
escape  pipe  of  a  steam-boat,  hence  the  name  '-steam-boat  spring."  These 
evomitions  of  water  and  gas,  are  from  the  face  of  a  vast  rock,  and  are 
frequently  heard  a  hundred  rods.  In  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  soda 
springs  are  innumerable  other  springs,  the  waters  of  which,  are  highly 
impregnated  with  soda  and  sulphur  ;  and  north,  and  in  fact,  in  every  di- 
rection from  them,  the  whole  country  wears  a  striking  and  volcanic  ap- 
pearance, especially,  at  the  north,  where  the  entire  earth,  seems  to  have 
been  burnt  out,  leaving  scarcely  any  thing,  but  masses  of  burnt  rock  and 
lava.  Numerous  hot  springs  are  also  found,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of 
these  springs,  which  produce  water  from  blood  heat,  to  the  boiling  point, 
in  many  of  which,  meat  is  cooked  perfectly  done,  in  less  than  four  min- 
utes. The  whole  surrounding  country  here,  affords  ample  evidences  of 
former,  vast,  and  numerous  volcanic  eruptions.  This  valley,  and  especi- 
ally that  portion  of  it,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  these  springs,  is  really 
a  very  extraordinar}-  section  of  country,  and  is  destined,  beyond  any 
kind  of  doubt,  to  become  immensely  important  and  valuable  ;  because  of 
its  peculiarly  favorable  locality ;  its  extraordinary,  wonderful,  and  de- 
lightful scenery ;  and  perhaps,  the  medicinal  properties  of  its  inexhausti- 
ble mineral  waters. 

There  are  several  very  extensive  valleys  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Hall, 
upon  the  river,  as  well  as  extensive  plains,  which  produce  a  great  suffi- 
ciency of  vegetation  and  timber,  but  the  surrounding  country,  more  remote 
from  the  fort,  is  extremely  hilly,  mountainous,  and  sterile,  generally  pro- 
ducing neither  timber,  nor  vegetation.  There  are  also  several  very  ex- 
tensive plains  and  valleys,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Fort  Boisia, 
which  are  quite  fertile,  and  capable  of  producing  grain  and  vegetables, 
in  great  abundance;  yet,  the  surrounding  country,  is  generally,  barren 
and  mountainous.  About  seventy  miles  below  Fort  Boisia,  in  a  direction 
northwest  by  north,  is  a  valley  of  very  considerable  extent,  which  abounds 
with  various  kinds   of  vegetation,   of   most   luxurious   growth.     This 


38  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

valley  is  situated  upon  a  tributary  of  Lewis'  river,  which  appears  to 
afford  a  great  sufficiency  of  durable  water.  In  the  midst  of  this  valley, 
is  a  single  pine  tree,  which  is  called  1' arbour  seuel,  the  lone  tree,  from 
which  circumstance,  the  valley  is  called  the  "  Lone  Tree  valley."  There 
is  not  a  sufficiency  of  timber  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  this  valley,  but 
in  the  surrounding  mountainous  region,  there  is  perhaps,  ample  timber, 
and  that  of  a  very  good  quality.  Forty  or  fifty  miles  south  southeast 
from  this  valley,  the  country  has  a  very  romantic,  and  volcanic  appear- 
ance. Large  extents  of  country  appear  to  have  been  visited  by  earth- 
quakes, which  have  torn  the  stupendous  mountains  of  rock  asunder,  and 
strewed  the  plains  below,  with  their  confused  fragments;  while  other  sec- 
tions, having  been  the  seat  of  desolating  volcanoes,  are  thickly  covered 
with  vast,  massive  heaps  of  burned  rock  and  lava.  Here  innumerable 
hot  and  boiling  springs  a|e  also  found,  the  waters  of  which,  are  so  hot, 
as  to  cook  any  kind  of  flesh,  sufficiently  for  the  table,  in  a  very  few  min- 
utes. These  springs  are  not  unfrcquently,  found  within  a  few  feet  of  run- 
ning streams  of  pure  cold  v/ater,  into  v/hich,  they  pour  their  boiling  wa- 
ters, which  are  so  hot,  even  when  commingled  with  this  cold  water,  as  to 
kill  the  fish  in  an  instant,  which  happens  to  be  swimming  within  its  ca- 
loric influence.  About  forty  miles  northwest,  from  the  "lone  tree,"  in 
the  midst  of  the  Blue  mountains,  is  a  very  extensive  valley,  which  is 
rich  and  productive,  and  which  is  well  timbered,  and  well'  watered.  It 
is  about  fifty  miles  in  extent,  in  either  direction,  and  is  surrounded  in 
every  direction,  by  hills  and  mountains,  which,  in  many  places,  are  cov- 
ered with  luxuriant  growths  of  pine  and  cedar.  The  form  of  this  valley 
i^  nearly  circular,  hence  its  name,  '•  la  Grande  rounde,"  the  Grand 
round.  This  is  one  of  the  most  fertile  valleys,  found  any  where  in  this 
section,  and  is  perhaps,  as  well  adapted  to  agricultural  and  grazing  pur- 
poses, as  any  portion  of  Oregon.  It  has  some  timber  upon  its  streams, 
but  not  sufficient  for  all  purposes,  yet  the  surrounding  hills  and  mountains 
abound  wiih  the  best  of  timber.  This  valley  is  destined  soon,  to  be  oc- 
cupied, and  to  become  a  very  valuable,  and  important  section  of  country. 
Ail  the  northern  part  of  this  section,  is  one  vast  concatenation  of  hills 
and  mountains,  which  are  generally,  spurs  of  the  Rocky  and  Blue 
mountains,  and  which,  in  many  places,  are  thickly  clad  Vv-ith  timber 
and  vegf  tation,  but  they  are  generally,  entirely  destitute  of  either.  Many 
of  these  hills  and  mountains  are  dcnst  ly  covered  with  forests  of  huge 
firs,  pines  and  cedars  ;  so  also  are  many  of  the  valleys  which  afre  founji 
upon  the  rivers  and  smaller  streams.  Besides  the  few  limited  valleys, 
which  are  found  in  this  part  of  the  Eastern  section,  there  are  also,  many 
undulating  prairies,  elevated  plains,  and  depressions  of  some  extent,  which 
are  tolerably  rich,  and  which  have  a  most  beautiful  and  picturesque  ap- 
pearance. 

The  flice  of  the  country,  in  the  Middle  sections,  presents  a  continued 
series  of  rolling  hiiis,  high  cliffs,  and  undulating  plains,  which  are  almost 
everywhere,  intersected  by  innumerable,  stupendous  mountain  spurs, 
wdiich  are  offsets  of  the  Blue,  and  Cascade  mountains,  and  which  are 
generally,  covered  with  a  kind  of  short  fine  grass,  called  "  bunch  grass," 
wormv/ood,  and  prickly-pear.  Some  of  these,  in  the  northern  part,  are 
also  thickly  covered  with  forests  of  lofty  firs,  pines  and  cedars.  In  this 
section  too,  there  are  numerous  small  valleys,  worthy  of  notice,  several 
of  which,   however,  have  received  partial   notice,  upon  another  page. 


TO   OREGON   AND    CALIFORNIA,  39 

There  is  a  very  beautiful  vallfy  on  the  Wallawalla  river,  in  tiie  vicinity 
of  Di.  Whitman's  mission.  This  valley  is  sufficiently  large  for  forty  or 
fifty  farms,  and  is  very  well  adapted  to  farming  purposes.  There  are  also 
other  valleys  in  this  vicinity,  of  considerable  extent,  and  of  more  than  or- 
dinary fertility,  which  are  situated  upon  John  Day's,  Umatilla,  Q,ms- 
nell's  and  de  Chute  rivers,  and  which,  together,  afford  a  large  extent  of 
very  excellent  country.  These  valleys  are  well  watered,  not  only  by  the 
rivers  just  referred  to,  but  also,  by  numerous  other  smaller  streams  and 
rivulets,  running  through  them,  in  every  direction.  There  are  also  sev- 
eral small  valleys  in  this  vicinity,  on  the  Columbia,  which  are  very  rich 
and  productive, 'though  of  much  less  importance,  because  of  their  very 
limited  extent.  The  principal  valleys  of  this  section,  south  of  the  Co- 
lumbia river,  are  those  in  the  extreme  southern  portion,  between  latitude 
43  deg.  north,  and  the  southern  boundary,  where  several  very  productive 
and  extensive  vallevs  are  found,  which  are  admirably  adapted  to  farming 
purposes,  much  the  greater  portions  of  which,  are  better  adapted  to  the  pur- 
poses of  pasturage.  The  scarcity  of  timber,  in  all  this  portion  of  the 
section,  will  however,  in  all  probability,  forever  remain,  an  insuperable 
barrier,  to  its  extensive  and  successful  cultivation  or  occupation;  though 
some  of  these  valleys  may,  perhaps,  be  supplied  with  timber,  from  the 
surrounding  (nountains,  many  of  which,  afford  timber  in  considerable 
abundance,  especially,  the  spurs  of  the  Cascade  mountains.  Timber  is 
also  occasionallv  found,  on  some  of  the  streams,  which  water  these  val- 
leys, thqugh  generally,  in  very  small  quantities,  and  of  inferior  quality. 
That  part  of  this  section,  which  lies  north  of  the  Columbia  river,  is 
much  more  broken  and  mountainous  than  the  southern  part,  but  unlike 
that  portion,  it  is,  in  many  places,  thickly  covered  with  compact  forests  of 
lofty  firs  and  pines.  In  this  portion  also,  are  many  small,  though  produc- 
tive valleys,  of  several  of  which,  I  have  spoken  in  the  description  of  the 
rivers.  Besides  these,  there  are  several  others,  of  much  greater  extent, 
but  of  less  fertility,  as  well  as  several  high,  rolling  prairies,  many  of 
which,  are  tolerably  well  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  pasturage,  though 
but  illy  adapted  to  farming  purposes,  because  of  the  extreme  variableness 
of  the  climate. 

The  surface  of  the  Western  section  only,  now  remains  to  be  described. 
That  portion  of  this  section,  which  lies  north  of  the  Columbia  river,  has 
innumerable  mountain  spurs,  high  cliffs,  and  rolling  hills,  interspersed 
throughStit  almost  every  portion.  These  are  generally,  thickly  clad 
with  compact  forests,  of  high  and  enormous  trees,  of  centuries  growth, 
the  like  of  which,  is  seldom,  if  ever  seen.  In  many  places  also,  the  un- 
dergrowth of  shrubs,  bushes,  vines  and  briers,  is  so  dense,  that  it  is  actu- 
ally impenetrable;  in  such  places,  however,  the  soil  is  extremely  pro- 
ductive. Many  small, 'though  rich  valleys,  tolerably  fertile  plains,  and 
prairies,  are  also  found,  throughout  this  northern  portion,  which  are  very 
well  adapted  both,  to  the  purposes  of  pasturage  and  farming.  Several 
prairies  and  plains  are  also  found,  on  the  Columbia  and  the  Cawlitz, 
some  of  which,  are  quite  extensive  and  productive.  There  is  a  very  rich 
section  of  conntry,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Fort  Vancouver,  which, 
by  trial,  is  found  to  produce  the  various  kinds  of  northern  grains  and 
fruits,  with  much  luxuriance.  Below  this  fort,  are  several  valleys  and 
prairies,  of  considerable  importance,  especially  on  the  Cawlitz,  where 
some  rather  extensive  valleys  and  prairies  are  found,  though  they  are  not, 


40  THE    EMIGRANTS'    GUIDE 

generally,  very  productive.  Above,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  this  fort,  a 
number  of  plains  and  valleys  are  also  found,  which  are  very  fertile, 
though  much  less  extensive,  than  that  just  described.  In  the  various 
portions  of  the  timbered  country,  many  plains  are  found,  which  are  sur- 
rounded with  almost  impenetrable  forests,  of  majestic  firs  and  pines,  of 
unequalled  growth.  Adjacent  to  Pugets'  sound,  large  tracts  of  Prairie 
country  are  also  found,  which  are  sufficiently  rich,  for  all  agricultural 
purposes,  and  which  yield  a  great  abundance  of  vegetation.  At  and  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  straits  de  Fucas,  are  some  extensive  plains  and  prairies, 
which,  although  not  sufficiently  rich,  for  farming  purposes,  afford  every 
advantage  for  grazing.  All  the  plains  and  valleys  of  the  northern  por- 
tion of  this  section,  are  much  better  suited  to  the  rearing  of  herds,  than  the 
growing  of  grain,  though  there  are  several  of  them  which  are  adaptable 
to  the  latter  purpose,  as  well  as  the  former,  yet  not  with  the  same  prospects 
of  success. 

The  portion  of  this  section,  which  is  found  south  of  the  Columbia 
river,  contains  much  the  most  extensive  and  productive  plains  and  valleys 
of  all  Oregon,  which  are  in  all  respects,  by  far,  the  most  valuable  portions 
of  that  country.  The  most  extensive  valley  here  found,  is  the  Wallammette 
valley,  which  lies  upon  the  Wallammette  river,  and  is  about  one  hundred 
and  fifty  miles  in  length,  and  thirty  or  forty  in  width,  on  each  side  of  the 
river.  It  is  a  very  beautiful  and  productive  valley,  and  as  it  is  well  tim- 
bered, well  watered,  and  as  it  yields, a  superabundance  of  all  the  grasses, 
and  the  various  other  kinds  of  vegetation,  it  is  admirably  suited  to  agricul- 
tural, and  grazing  purposes.  In  the  vicinity,  and  northwest  from  this 
valley,  are  the  Fualitine  plains,  which  are  about  fifty  miles  in  length,  and 
fifteen  in  width.  These  are  equal  in  beauty  and  productiveness,  if  not 
superior  to  the  Wallammette  valley.  They  produce  the  various  kinds  of 
vegetation,  with  much  profusion,  and  they  are  very  well  timbered,  and  well 
watered;  hence  their  adaptation  to  the  purposes  of  grazing  and  farming, 
are  readily  seen.  Further  south,  numerous  other  beautiful,  and  rich  val- 
leys, are  also  found,  the  first  of  which,  I  shall  notice,  are  those  lying  upon 
the  Umpqua  river.  In  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Fort  Umpqua,  a  valley 
of  about  thirty  miles  in  length,  and  ten  in  width,  is  found,  which  is  every- 
where surrounded  by  an  exteiisivT,  broken  and  mountainous  country,  but 
which  is  a  very  beautiful  and  rich  valley,  abounding  with  all  the  various 
grasses,  and  good  timber.  There  is  also  another  valley  upon  this  river, 
of  much  greater  extent,  which  commences  about  ten  miles  above  the  east- 
ern extremity,  of  that  just  described,  and  extends  up,  and  south  of  the 
river,  about  seventy  miles.  This  is  among  the  most  beautiful,  and  pro- 
ductive valleys  of  all  Oregon;  abounding  with  the  various  grasses,  and 
good  timber  of  most  luxuriant  growth,  and  having  an  unusually  deep, 
rich  soil,  it  is  peculiarly  fitted  both,  to  the  purposes  of  grazing  and  farm- 
ing. South  of  this,  upon  Rogue's  river,  are  several  other  very  extensive 
and  unusually  rich  valleys.  The  principal  of  them  is  found  upon  that 
river,  about  sixty  miles  from  the  ocean  It  is  about  eighty  miles  long, 
and  averages  from  ten,  to  forty  miles  in  width,  on  each  side  of  the  river. 
For  beauty  of  scenery,  richness  of  soil,  abundance  of  timber,  and  vegeta- 
tion; and  for  its  peculiar  adaptation  to  both,  grazing  and  agricultural  pur- 
poses, this  valley  much  surpasses  all  others,  in  any  part  of  Oregon.  Be- 
sides this,  there  are  also,  several  others,  which  are  found  upon,  and  in 
the  vicinity  of  this  river,  and  which,  are  much  less  extensive,  but  equally 


i 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  41 

productive  of  both,  timber  and  the  various  grasses.  All  these  valleys, 
however,  art  surrounded  by  stupendous  mountains,  high  hills,  and  ele- 
vated plains,  which  are  generally,  entirely  destitute  of  timber,  and,  in 
many  places,  devoid  of  all  vegetable  productions.  The  only  valleys 
which  remain  to  be  noticed,  are  those  found  upon  the  Klamet  river,  where 
numerous  valleys  are  to  be  found,  which,  although  very  limited  in  extent, 
possess  a  very  rich  soil,  and  yield  a  superabundance  of  good  timber,  and 
most  luxuriant  vegetation.  Throughout  all  this  section,  besides  the  vari- 
ous valleys  before  enumerated,  and  more  particularly  described,  there  are 
numbers  of  others,which  are  equally  productive  and  valuable,  though  of 
much  less  extent.  Upon,  and  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Umpqun, 
Ro<Tue's  and  Klamet  rivers,  there  are  not  only  the  valleys  referred  to,  hut 
there  are  also  several  others,  as  well  as  numerous  sections  of  high  lands, 
undulating,  elevated  plains,  and  rolling  prairies,  which  are  also  very  pro- 
ductive, and  which,  are  admirably  suited  to  the  purpose  of  grazing,  as 
well  as  that  of  farming.  This  southern  portion  of  the  Western  section,  is 
by  far,  the  most  valuable  and  delightful  portion  of  Oregon,  and  in  point  of 
richness  and  productions,  it  very  much  resembles  the  unequalled  plains 
and  valleys  of  California. 

The  soil  of  all  the  Eastern  section  is,  for  the  most  part,  extremely 
poor;  that  of  the  plains  is  generally,  a  light,  sandy  loam  ;  that  of  the 
valleys,  especially  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  rivers,  and  smaller 
streams,  is  rich  an. I  ahuvial,  while  the  hills  and  mountains  generally  pre- 
S(.'iit  a  most  barr'^n  and  desolate  surface,  which,  for  many  miles  together, 
presents  nothing  but  b  irnmg  sands,  and  hills  and  mountains  of  unsurpass- 
ed sterility.  Here,  however,  every  variety  of  soil  is  found,  from  the  ex- 
treme sterility  of  the  burning  sands  of  the  Aral)ian  deserts,  to  the  deep  rich 
alluvial  soil  of  th'=;  most  frih'  Egyptian  valleys.  The  prevailing  rock 
of  this  section  is  generally,  basalt,  granite,  pudding  stone  and  talcon 
slate,  which  in  many  places,  extend  entirely  to  the  surface,  for  several 
miles  together.  It  may  be  estimated,  with  a  close  approximation  to  exact- 
ness, that  not  more  than  one  twentieth  part  of  all  this  section,  is,  in  any 
wise,  suited  to  agricultural  purposes,  while  one  tenth  part  of  it,  may  per- 
haps, be  found  to  be  tolerably  well  adapted  to  pasturage.  The  soil  of 
the  Middle  section  is,  as  a  general  thiuir,  a  light  yellow  sand,  e!ay  or 
h)am  ;  that  of  the  valleys,isusually,  a  black,  alluvial,  vegetable  loam.  South 
of  the  Columbia,  the  hills  and  mountains  present  a  surface  of  extraordi- 
nary sterility  ;  hut  those  ncn-th  of  tliat  river,  have  a  soilof  a  light,  brown 
loam,  or  a  thin,  brown,  vegetable  earlH.  The  rock  of  this  secdon  is, 
generally,  confined  to  the  hills  and  mountains,  and  in  the  northern  part,  it 
consists  principally,  of  granite,  pudding  stone  and  basalt;  that  of  the 
southern  j)art,  consists  chielly,  of  granite,  basalt,  talcon  slate  and  horn- 
blend.  Although  this  variety  of  rock  will  he  found  highly  serviceable, 
in  the  ultimate  improvement  of  the  country,  yet  as  it  rises  entirely  to  the 
surface,  for  miles  together,  it  adds  very  much  to  the  sterility,  and  impen- 
etrability, of  many  portions  of  this,  otherwise,  sufficiently  sterile,  and 
forbidding  region.  Of  all  this  section  not  more,  perhaps,  t^an  one  tenth 
part,  is  at  all,  susceptible  of  successful  cultivation,  nor  is  more  than 
one  fifth  part  of  it,  well  suited  to  grazing  purposes.  The  soil  of  the 
Western  section,  varies  very  much,  in  the  different  portions.  North  of 
the  Columbia  river,  that  of  the  hills  and  mountains,  is  generally,  a  light, 
5 


42  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

brown,  loam  or  vegetable  earth,  upon  a  stratum  of  gravel  or  sand  ;  that 
of  the  plains  and  prairies,  is  usually,  a  deep,  brotvn,  vegetable  mould,  hav- 
ing a  subsoil  of  sand  and  clay ;  and  that  of  the  valleys  and  lower  sections, 
is  a  deep  black  loam,  upon  a  substratum  of  clay  or  trap  rock.  The 
principal  rock  of  this  part  of  the  section,  appears  to  be  granite  and  pud- 
ding stone,  especially  in  the  extreme  north,  but  in  many  parts  of  tlie 
more  southern  portion,  are  found  basalt  and  liornblend.  South  of  the  Co- 
lumbia river,  the  soil  of  the  valleys  is  very  fertile,  being  generally,  decom- 
posed basalt  or  a  deep,  black,  vegetable  loam,  upon  a  stratum  of  gravel, 
sand  or  unctuous  clay  ;  that  of  the  plains,  is  usually,  a  deep,  brown,  veg- 
etable loam,  the  substrata  being  stiff  clay,  gravel  and  sand  :  and  that  of 
tlie  hills  and  mountains,  is  a  light,  brown,  and  thin  vegetable  earth,  upon 
a  stratum  of  gravel  or  sand.  Many  of  die  hills  and  mountains,  however, 
are  entirely  sterile,  and  are  principally  composed  of  basalt,  stone  and 
slate,  yet  in  the  extreme  southern  part,  the  rocks  are  usually  primitive,  and 
consist  principally  of  talcon  slate,  hornblend  and  granite.  Of  lliis  sec- 
tion, about  one  fifth  part,  is  arable  land,  and  one  third  is,  perhaps,  sel- 
dom surpassed  in  its  adaptation  to  grazing  purposes.  I  am  well  aware 
that  the  fertility  and  productiveness  of  Oregon,  are  viewed,  by  many  who 
have  visited  that  region,  in  a  much  more  favorable  light,  than  the  above  and 
foregoing,  would  seem  to  indicate ;  but  however  that  may  be,  I  design 
merely  to  give  facts,  as  they  occur  to  me,  leaving  their  corroboration  to  the 
concurring  testimony  of  others,  and  the  developments  of  time. 


CHAPTER  V 
A  DESCRIPTION    OF  OREGON. 

The  climate  ;  of  Eastern  section ;  of  Middle  section  ;  of  Western  section. 
Difference  of  temperature  on  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific;  caiise  of  Great  va- 
riety of  climate.  Health.  Absence  of  febrific  causes.  Productions  ;  of 
Eastern  section;  of  JMiddle  section;  of  Western  section.  Grazing  capa- 
biUlies.  Stock  driven  from.  California.  Value  of  cattle;  of  horses  ;  of 
sheep.  Fish ;  abundance  of ;  uhen  taken;  how  taken;  method  of  curing. 
Shell  fish  ;  oysters  ;  almndance  of  Whales  captured  by  Indians.  Game 
of  Eastern  section;  of  Middle  section  ;  of  Western  section.  Fur-bearing 
animals;  diminution  of  Wolves.  Water- fowls ;  abundance  of ;  other 
feathered  animals  :  variety  of.  Forts;  number  of;  <f  Eastern  section  ; 
of  Middle  section  ;  of  Western  section.  Fort  V<i,ncouver  ;  hospitalities  of 
Coiirtesy  and  kindness  of  Dr.  McLoughlin*;  of  Mr.  Douglass.  Farms 
of  the  company  ;  at  Cawlitz  ;  at  Nlsqually  ;  at  Langly ;  ai  the  Fualitine 
plains.  Hudsons'' Bay  company  ;  origin  of;  organization  of ;  its  contin- 
uance. 

The  climate  of  .Oregon  is,  perhaps,  as  varied  and  variable,  as  that  of 
any  part  of  the  known  world,  which  fact  is  attributable  to  the  great  diver- 
sity of  local  positions,  which  the  various  portions  of  the  country  occupy, 
in  reference  to  those  regions  of  perpetual  snow,  and  the  Pacific  ocean,  as 
well  as  the  altitude  of  each  portion,  in  reference  to  the  other.     The  same 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  43 

diversity  of  climate,  as  of  soil,  prevails  in  the  diflerent  sections,  and  the 
climate,  like  the  soil,  is  much  more  diversified  in  the  Eastern  section,  than 
ill  either  of  the  others.  In  many  portions  of  this  section  you  experi- 
ence perpetual  winter,  while  in  others  you  have  continued  spring,  depend- 
ing upon  the  position  which  you  occupy  ;  and  even  in  the  same  portion 
of  the  country,  one  day,  you  have  the  extreme  heat  of  a  southern  sum- 
mer, and  the  next,  the  excessive  cold  of  a  northern  winter.  There  are 
other  portions  of  this  section  where,  in  the  short  space  of  24  hours, 
you  experience  four  distinct  changes,  corresponding  in  temperature,  with 
a  northern  spring,  summer,  autumn  and  winter.  The  mercury  in  Fah- 
renheit's scale,  rising  to  50°  in  the  morning,  to  120°  at  noon,  and  falling 
again  to  50°  in  the  evening,  and  to  12°  below  zero  at  night.  These  re- 
marks, however,  are  designed  to  apply  only  to  a  portion  of  this  section. 
In  many  other  portions,  it  is  both  much  warmer,  and  much  colder,  the 
mercury  frequently  rising  to  160°  and  falling^^to  18°  belovv^  zero.  The 
mean  temperature,  of  course,  differs  very  much  in  the  various  sections, 
but  it  is  said  to  be  about  50°  of  Fahrenheit,  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Hall. 
Those  portions  which  have  a.  climate  of  this  variable  character,  are  gen- 
erally in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  regions  of  perpetual  snow.  Rain 
very  seldom  falls  in  any  part  of  this  section,  during  the  spring  or  sum- 
mer, nor  do  great  quantities  fall  during  "the  autumn  or  winter.  In  the 
winter,  snow  falls  very  frequently,  though  not  to  a  great  depth  ;  it  lies  but 
a  short  time  in  the  valleys,  but  eternally  on  the  mountains.  Hence  then 
it  appears,  that  you  may  enjoy  every  possible  variety  of  climate,  from 
perpetual  winter,  to  perennial  spring.  The  climate  of  the  Middle  section, 
is  not  as  variable  as  that  of  the  Eastern  section,  but  much  more  so  than 
that  of  the  Western  section;  it  is  subject  however,  to  very  great  extremes 
of  heat  and  cold.  In  the  summer,  the  mercury  in  Fahrenheit's  scale,  fre- 
quently rises  to  180°,  in  the  shade,  and  as  frequently,  falls  as  low  as  mi- 
nus 28°  of  Fahrenheit.  As  in  the  Eastern  section,  the  temperature  of  the 
various  portions,  differs  very  much,  depending  upon  the  altitude  of  each 
portion,  and  its  proximity  to  the  snowy  mountains,  yet  the  mean  temper- 
ature is  said  to  be  about  52°  of  Fahrenheit  at  Fort  Wallawalla,  and  the 
daily  difference  of  temperature,  is  said  to  be,  about  40°  of  Fahrenheit,  at 
and  in  the  vicinity  of  that  place.  It  very  seldom  rains  in  this  section, 
during  the  spring,  summer  or  autumn,  consequently,  there  are  about  nine 
months  of  continued  drought,  during  which  time,  here,  as  in  the  Eastern 
sections,  dews  seldom  fall,  hence  a  dryness  and  aridity  of  atmosphere  pre- 
vails throughout  both  these  sections,  which  are  seldom  elsewhere  known. 
The  climate  of  all  the  Western  section  is  very  mild,  and  notwith- 
standing its  northern  latitude,  it  has  no  excess  of  cold,  nor  has  it  any  ex- 
cess of  heat.  The  mean  temperature  of  this  section,  at  Fort  Vancouver, 
is  57  deg.  of  Fahrenheit.  Snow  very  seldem  falls  more  than  four  or  five 
inches  in  depth,  and  generally  disappears  in  three  or  four  days.  Run- 
ning water  never  freezes  south  of  the  Columbia  river,  and  that  river  has 
been  closed,  opposite  Vancouver,  but  three  times  within  the  last  forty 
years,  and  even  then,  it  remained  closed  but  a  very  few  days.  It  is  so 
mild  in  latitude  45  deg.  north,  and  even  in  50  deg.  north,  that  it  does  not 
become  necessary  either  to  house,  or  feed  any  kind  of  stock  during  the 
winter.  The  valleys  are  generally  thicklycovered  with  the  grasses,  and 
various  other  kinds  of  vegetation,  during  the  entire  winter.  Farther  south, 
the  vegetation  puts  forth  very  soon  after  the  rains  commence  to  fall,  and 


44  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

continues  to  grow  all  winter,  so  that  the  pasturage  for  stock,  is  equally, 
as  good  at  that  season,  as  at  any  other,  and  perhaps,  better  than  it  is  in 
the  summer.  Here  during  the  winter,  not  only  the  valleys,  but  the  hills 
and  mountains  also,  are  everywhere  covered  with  green,  fresh  grass;  but 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  summer,  and  fore  part  of  the  fall,  from  the  con- 
tinued drought,  all  vegetation  is  generally,  completely  dried  and  divested  of 
its  principal  nutriment.  The  rainy  season  commences  in  November,  and 
continues  until  March  inclusive,  and  during  all  the  residue  of  the  year, 
scarcely  a  drop  of  rain  falls.  In  the  rainy  season,  rains  fall  almost  inces- 
santly, but  not  in  great  quantities  ;  though  they  usually  fall  in  such  quan- 
tities, and  so  continually,  as  to  prevent  the  advantageous  transaction  of 
most  kinds  of  business.  The  cold,  or  winter  weather,  is  chiefly,  confin- 
ed to  the  months  of  December,  January  and  February.  From  what  has 
already  been  said,  in  reference  to  the  climate  of  this  section,  it  will 
be  readily  perceived,  that  there  is  a  very  great  difference  of  tempera- 
ture, in  the  same  latitude,  on  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  coasts.  There  are 
more  than  ten  degrees  difierence  between  the  temperature  on  the  east  and 
west  side  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  in  the  same  latitude,  especially,  on  the 
coasts.  It  is  milder  in  latitude  50  deg.  north,  on  the  Pacific  coast,  than  it 
is  in  latitude  40  deg.  north,  on  the  Atlantic  coast.  The  chief  cause  of  this 
extraordinary  difference  of  temperature,  in  the  same  latitude,  is  perhaps, 
the  prevailing  winds,  on  the  Pacific  coast,  from  the  north  during  the  sum.- 
mer,  and  .from  the.  south  during  the  winter.  The  climate  of  the  extreme 
southern  part  of  this  section,  is  much  milder,  and  more  delightful,  than 
that  just  described.  Here  snow  seldom  falls,  and  there  is  much  less  rain 
during  the  winter,  or  rainy  season;  the  climate  here,  in  fact,  very  much 
resembles  that  of  Upper  California.  From  the  foregoing  f^acts,  in  refer- 
ence to  the  climate,  very  correct  conclusions  rnay,  perhaps,  be  formed  in 
reference  to  the  health  of  Oregon.  Febrile  diseases  are  seldom  if  ever 
known,  in  any  portion  of  the  Eastern  or  Middle  sections;  and  as  no  local 
febrific  causes  are  found  in  any  part  of  these  sections,  the  presumption  is, 
that  they  will  always  possess  superior  advantages,  in  point  of  healthful- 
ness.  The  Western  section  is  also  very  healthy,  yet  intermittent  fevers 
prevail  to  a  limited  extent,  in  some  portions.  These  fevers,  however,  are 
found  to  be  of  a  much  less  obstinate  character,  than  those  which  prevail 
on  the  east  side  of  the  mountains,  as  they  yield  very  readily  to  any  of  the 
ordinary  curatives.  Cases  of  remittent  fevers,  have  scarcely  ever  been 
known,  in  any  portion  of  this  country.  It  has  been  remarked,  that  al- 
though this  country  appears  to  be  entirely  exempt  from  all  local  causes 
of  disease,  yet  it  has,  at  some  former  period,  been  very  unhealthy.  As  a 
proof  of  this  view,  you  are  referred  to  the  numerous,  and  extensive  bury- 
ing-grounds  of  the  natives;  but  the  devastation  which  disease  has  evi- 
dently made  among  them,  has  been  much  more  attributable  to  the  rude 
treatment,  which  they  adopt,  than  to  the  obstinacy  of  the  disease. 

The  productions  of  the  Eastern  Section  are  much  more  limited,  both  in 
variety  and  quantity,  than  those  of  the  Western  section,  yet  they  are  in 
all  respects,  very  similar  to  those  of  the  Middle  section.  The  same  di- 
versity obtains,  throughout  all  these  sections,  in  reference  to  productions, 
as  well  as  to  soil  and  climate,  which  will  be  fully  seen,  from  what  will 
now  follow.  As  before  remarked,  timber  is  found  in  some  portions  of  the 
Eastern  section,  in  sufficient  quantities  for  all  valuable  purposes,  but  as  a 
general  thing,  there  is  a  very  great  deficiency  of  timber.     Wherever  it 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  45 

is  found,  however,  it  usually  grows  with  great  luxuriance.  It  consists 
chiefly  of  white  and  yellow  pine,  white  and  red  cedar,  fir,  spruce, 
hemlock,  arbour  vita3,  cherry  and  willow.  Many  portions  of  this  section  are 
well  suited  to  the  producing  of  wheat,  rye,  oats,  barley,  buckwheat,  hemp, 
flax,  potatoes,  turnips,  and  in  fact,  all  kinds  of  vegetables,  common  to  a 
northern  climate,  as  well  as  such  fruits  as  apples,  pears,  peaches,  plums, 
grapes  and  cherries.  In  addition  to  these  fruits  many  wild  fruits  are  also 
found,   in  the  greatest  abundance.      Indian  corn   will  not  mature  in   any 

fiart  of  this  section,  which  is  attributed  to  the  very  cold  nights,  and  ear- 
y  frosts,  to  which  every  portion  of  this  section  is  subject.  The  produc- 
tions of  the  Middle  section,  very  much  resemble  those  of  the  Eastern, 
yet  there  is  perhaps,  a  slight  shade  of  difl^ercnce,  in  some  of  the  diflerent 
portions.  The  timber  of  this  section,  consists  for  the  most  part,  of  fir, 
pine,  cedar,  spruce,  hemlock,  oak  of  several  kinds,  ash,  arbutus,  arbour 
vitse,  maple,  willow  and  cherry,  in  the  north ;  and  fir,  pine,  cedar,  oak, 
ash,  arbutus  and  willow  in  the  south.  This  section  is  also  capable,  in 
many  places,  of  producing  wheat,  rye,  oats,  barley,  beans,  peas,  hemp, 
flax,  tobacco  and  most  kinds  of  vegetables,  in  considerable  abundance. 
Several  kinds  of  fruits,  may  also  be  produced  here,  in  quantities  suflicient 
for  all  ordinary  purposes.  Such  fruits  as  apples,  pears,  peaches,  plums, 
cherries,  grapes,  and  several  kinds  of  wild  fruits,  grow  most  luxuriantly, 
in  various  portions  of  this  section.  But  very  few  agricultural  experi- 
ments have,  as  yet,  been  made  in  either  the  Eastern  or  Middle  sections, 
but  sufficient  has  been  determined,  in  this  respect,  to  warrant  the  forego- 
ing statements.  In  the  Middle,  as  in  the  Eastern  section,  it  has  also  been 
determined  that  our  common  Indian  corn,  will  not  mature,  which  is  ovv'- 
ing  to  the  same  cause  as  that  before  mentioned. 

In  the  Western  section,  we  find  a  much  greater  variety,  and  abundance 
of  productions.  The  timber  of  this  section,  consists  chiefly,  of  pine,  fir, 
cedar,  red  and  white  oak,  ash,  arbour  vitce,  arbutus,  maple,  poplar,  wil- 
low and  cherry.  The  undergrowth  consists,  generally,  of  hazel,  rose, 
grape  vines,  and  a  great  variety  of  shrubs  and  bushes,  all  of  which  to- 
gether, form  an  undergrowth  so  dense,  thpa  in  many  places,  it  is  actually 
impenetrable.  Timber  of  the  most  extraordinary  growth  is  found  in 
many  portions  of  this  section.  Both  in  the  north  and  south,  it  is  not  un- 
common to  see  fir  and  pine  trees  three  hundred  feet  in  height,  and  from 
twenty  to  sixty  feet  in  circumference.  Their  usual  height,  however,  is 
from  fifty  to  two  hundred  feet ;  and  their  circumference  from  ten  to  thirty 
feet.  There  are  very  few  portions  of  the  world,  perhaps,  which  afford 
a  gr'eater  variety,  and  quantity,  or  a  better  quality  of  timber,  than  this 
section  of  Oregon.  The  timber  south  of  the  Columbia,  although  it  is,  in 
many  places,  equally  as  large  and  thrifty,  yet  it  is  not  as  valuable  for  lum- 
ber, as  that  north  of  that  river.  In  the  south,  it  is  much  more  spungy 
and  porous,  than  in  the  north,  consequently,  it  is  much  more  subject  to 
contraction  and  expansion,  when  manufactured  into  lumber.  The  south 
side  of  the  trees,  in  the  south,  also  possess  much  more  porosity  than  the 
north  side,  consequently,  lumber  made  of  this  timber  would  be  much  less 
valuable,  as  one  part  of  it  would  be  much  more  subject,  than  the  other,  to  ex- 
cessive contractions  and  expansions.  Both  the  climate  and  the  soil  in 
many  portions  of  this  section  are  well  suited  to  the  growing  of  wheat, 
rye,  oats,  barley,  flax,  hemp,  beans,  peas  and  tobacco,  as  well  as  the  vari- 
ous kinds  of  garden  vegetables.     Indian  corn  does  not  mature  in  any 


46  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

part  of  this  section,  as  far  as  it  has  been  tried,  but  there  is  no  doubt  but 
that  it,  as  well  as  cane,  cotton  and  rice,  may  be  grown  with  much  success, 
in  the  extreme  southern  part  of  this  section.  Several  kinds  of  the  north- 
ern fruits  succeed  here,  extremely  well,  especially  apples,  pears,  peaches, 
plums,  grapes  and  cherries.  For  the  growing  of  all  the  northern  fruits, 
there  are  very  few  countries  better  adapted  than  this  section,  the  extreme 
southern  part  of  which,  is  also  admirably  suited  to  the  growing  of  many 
of  the  tropical  fruits.  Wheat  is  the  principal  grain  grown  in  this  sec- 
tion as  yet,  the  greatest  quantities  of  which  are  produced  at  the  Wallam- 
mette  valley,  the  Fualitine  plains,  and  the  farms  of  theHudson'sBay Compa- 
ny, at  Vancouver,  Nisqually  and  the  Cawlitz.  The  average  crop,  is  about 
fifteen  bushels  to  the  acre,  yet,  I  have  no  doubt,  but  that  portion  of  this  sec- 
tion, which  lies  south  of  the  Columbia  river,  and  which  is  susceptible  of 
cultivation,  may,  with  proper  agricultural  skill,  be  made  to  produce  twen- 
ty-five or  thirty  bushels  to  the  acre.  The  northern  portion  will  never 
produce  so  abundantly,  as  the  southern  part,  for,  as  has  been  before  re- 
marked, its  soil  is  generally,  much  less  fertile,  and  its  climate  much  less 
adapted  to  the  luxuriant  production  of  any  kind  of  grain  or  vegetables. 
Wherever  wheat  has  been  grown  as  yet,  the  first  crop  is  found  to  be  of 
very  little  value ;  so  valueless  in  fact,  that  in  many  instances  it  is  not  har- 
vested. I  was  informed  by  several  respectable  farmers,  that  from  the  first 
sowing,  they  could  not,  as  a  general  thing,  rely  upon  receiving  more  than 
the  seed  sown,  and  that,  in  many  instances,  even  the  seed  sown,  was  not 
received.  But  a  fact  was  also  stated  to  me,  by  several  respectable  gentle- 
men, which  clearly  shows  the  peculiar  adaptation  of  this  country,  to  the 
growing  of  this  species  of  grain,  especially,  after  it  is  reduced  to  a  proper 
state  of  cultivation.  The  fact  alluded  to  is,  that  after  having  subdued  the 
land  properly,  having  sowed  your  wheat,  and  having  harvested  it,  a 
spontaneous  growth  will  spring  up  the  succeeding  year,  and  you  will  re- 
ceive a  very  good  crop  without  a  second  sowing. 

As  has  been  stated  upon  a  former  page,  all  the  different  sections  of  Or- 
egon, are  much  better  suited  to  the  rearing  of  herds,  than  to  farming  pur- 
poses. Some  experiments  in  this  respect  have  been  made,  in  all  the 
different  sections.  In  the  Eastern  section,  at  Forts  Hall  and  Boisia,  both 
horses  and  cattle  are  reared  in  large  numbers,  where  they  thrive  most 
admirably.  The  Indians  of  this  section  also,  rear  horses  in  vast  num- 
bers, and  of  a  very  superior  quality.  In  the  Middle  section,  horses  and 
cattle  are  also  reared  in  great  numbers,  by  the  missionaries,  at  their  differ- 
ent stations,  and  by  the  gentlemen  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  at  the 
different  fg^ts.  The  Indians  here  also,  rear  horses,  in  the  various  parts 
of  this  section,  in  very  large  numbers.  Both  the  horses  and  cattle  of  these 
sections  thrive  exceedingly  well,  and  that  too,  without  the  ordinary  atten- 
tion of  feeding  and  housing.  The  Western  section  is  seldom  surpassed,  as 
a  grazing  country,  and  it  is  to  this  purpose  that  it  is  most  eminently 
adapted,  especially,  the  southern  portion,  where  cattle,  horses  and  sheep, 
may  be  reared  in  any  numbers,  with  no  other  expense  than  that  of  era- 
ploying  herdsmen  and  shepherds.  The  necessity  of  feeding  and  housing 
any  kind  of  herds,  is  here  obviated,  by  the  mildness  of  the  climate,  and 
the  puUing  forth  of  the  vegetation,  during  the  winter  season.  Vast  herds  of 
horses,  cattle  and  sheep,  are  latterly  driven  to  this  section,  from  Upper 
California,  by  which  means,  the  entire  country  is  destined,  in  a  very  short 
time,  to  become  extensively  stocked.     Each  farmer  has,  even  now,  from 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  4t 

twenty  to  a  thousand  head  of  cattle,  about  as  many  horses,  and  from  twen^ 

ly  to  one  hundred  head  of  sheep.  Notwithstanding  the  ease  and  facility 
with  which  herds  are  here  reared,  they  are  equally  as  valuable,  if  nof 
more  so,  here  than  they  are  in  the  States.  Horses  are  worth  from  twenty 
to  fifty  dollars  per  head;  oxen  from  forty  to  eighty  dollars  per  yoke  ;  cows 
from  ten  to  thirty  dollars  per  head ;  other  grown  cattle,  from  eight  to  fifteen 
dollars  per  head;  and  sheep,  from  one  to  four  dollars  per  head.  Cattle 
and  horses  however,  which  are  driven  from  the  States,  are  considered 
much  more  valuable,  than  those  which  are  driven  from  CalifornTa,  as 
they  are  thought  to  be  better  blooded;  which  view,  I  think,  is  entirely  un- 
founded. But  the  preference  of  our  people,  for  every  thing  that  is  Amer- 
ican, every  thing  that  is  reared  in  their  own  country,  as  well  as  the  great 
difficulty  of  driving  cattle  and  horses  to  that  country,  will  always  cause 
them  to  command  a  much  higher  price.  Oxen  driven  from  the  States, 
are  worth  from  fifty  to  one  hundred  dollars  per  yoke ;  cows  from  twenty 
to  fifty  dollars  per  head;  and  other  grown  cattle,  from  fifteen  to  forty  dol- 
lars per  head.  Horses  driven  from  the  States,  are  generally,  worth  from 
fifty  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  per  head.  I  have  frequently  heard 
the  belief  expressed,  that  neither  horses  nor  cattle,  driven  from  the  States, 
would  thrive  in  that  country,  because  of  the  incessant  rains  of  the  winters 
there,  and  their  not  being  housed  during  that  inclement  season;  but  ex- 
perience proves,  that  they  thrive  most  admirably,  and  even  better  than 
they  do  in  the  States. 

All  the  various  rivers  of  Oregon,  abound  with  a  great  variety  of  fish, 
of  the  very  best  kinds.  They  are  very  abundant  in  all  the  different  sec- 
tions ;  but  Ihe  streams  of  the  Western  section  afford  the  greatest  abundance. 
They  are  found,  however,  in  each  of  the  other  sections,  in  quantities  suffi- 
cient to  supply  a  very  dense  population.  There  are  innumerable  and  in- 
exhaustible fisheries  on  the  coast,  and  in  all  the  different  rivers,  through- 
out all  the  different  sections,  both  in  the  north  and  south.  These  abound 
with  fish  in  the  greatest  abundance,  and  of  almost  every  variety,  consisting, 
cJiiefly,  however,  of  salmon,  salmon  trout,  cod,  carp,  sturgeons,  flounder, 
ray,  perch,  lamprey  and  herring.  Most  of  these  are  taken  throughout  the 
year,  but  in  much  greater  quantities,  during  the  months  of  May  and  Octo- 
ber; at  which  seasons,  all  the  different  tribes  of  Indians,  are  congregated 
at  the  different  fisheries,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  their  supplies  for  the 
residue  of  the  year.  Most  of  the  Indians  of  all  Oregon,  subsist  almost 
entirely  upon  them,  either  in  their  fresh  or  dried  state.  In  drying  them, 
no  salt  is  used  ;  they  are  either  exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  or  hung  or 
spread  in  houses  provided  for  that  purpose,  and  dried  in  the  shade.  The 
atmosphere  is  so  pure  and  arid,  that  they  are  perfectly  cured  in  a  very  few 
days,  even  in  the  shade,  without  salt,  and  without  any  danger  whatever, 
of  putrefaction.  The  Indians  not  only  take  them  in  such  quantities  as  to 
supply  their  own  wants,  but  also  in  sufficient  quantities,  to  supply  all  the 
different  settlers,  during  the  entire  year.  They  usually  take  them 
with  seines,  which  they  make  for  that  purpose,  and  which,  in  fact,  are 
nearly  as  well  constructed  as  those  used  by  our  own  people.  Spears  and 
peculiarly  constructed  traps,  are  also  used  in  taking  them,  in  some  por- 
tions of  the  country ;  and  in  others,  the  Indians  take  them  very  readily, 
even  with  their  hands.  In  small  streams,  for  the  purpose  of  taking 
them  more  readily,  with  their  spears  or  hands,  they  drive  small  stakes, 
thickly  in  the  bottom  of  the  streams,  side  by  side,  entirely  across  their  beds. 


48  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

which  prevent  the  fish  from  passing  up  or  down,  but  do  not  materially 
interrupt  the  flow  of  the  water.  The  fish,  being  thus  interrupted  in  their 
course,  congl  egate  in  great  numbers,  at  the  stakes,  passing  from  space  to 
space,  endeavoring  to  get  through,  when  the  Indians,  taking  advantage  of 
their  confusion,  wade  among  ihem,  and  take  them  with  all  ease,  either 
with  their  spears,  hands  or  otherwise.  Upon  the  coast,  several  kinds  of 
shell  fish  are  found,  such  as  crabs,  clams,  muscles  and  oysters,  all  of 
which,  are  used  by  the  natives,  in  that  vicinity,  as  a  principal  article  of 
food.  The  oysters  of  Oregon  are  very  small,  but  they  are  of  a  very  ex- 
cellent kind,  and  are  perhaps,  not  inferior,  to  those  taken  any  where  on 
the  Atlantic  coast.  Along  the  coast,  the  entire  extent  of  the  country, 
whales  are  found  in  great  numbers,  and  they  are  frequently  taken  by  the 
Indians,  especially  at  the  straits  of  Juan  de  Fucas.  The  American  and 
English  whale  ships,  very  seldom  visit  that  region,  although  they  might 
find  it  very  profitable  to  do  so,  as  whales  are  as  abundant  there,  as  in  any 
other  portion  of  the  north  Pacific. 

The  game  of  the  Eastern  and  Middle  sections,  is  not  very  abundant. 
It  consists  chiefly,  of  bear,  wolves,  elk,  antelope,  muskrats,  foxes,  beav- 
ers and  martens.  Buff'alo  are  also  found,  in  the  Eastern  section ;  but  in 
much  less  numbers,  than  in  the  country  east  of  the  Rocky  mountains. 
No  game,  can  be  said  to  be  very  plentiful,  in  either  of  these  sections. 
Persons  may  travel  through  many  parts,  of  both  these  sections,  for 
weeks  together,  and  not  see  a  wild  animal  of  any  kind,  during  the  whole 
time.  The  fur-bearing  animals  are  the  most  numerous,  but  they  are  much 
less  numerous  latterly,  and  they  are  constantly  diminishing  in  numbers. 
Other  than  the  fur-bearing  animals  the  game  of  the  Middle  section, 
is  of  very  litfle  or  no  importance,  that  of  the  Eastern  section  is 
important  only  for  the  fur-bearing  animals  and  the  buffalo.  Wa- 
ter-fowls are  very  seldom  met  with,  in  either  of  these  sections,  which, 
may  perhaps,  be  attributed  to  the  temperature  of  their  waters,  the  sterility 
of  their  soil,  and  the  variableness  of  their  climate.  The  game  of  the 
Western  section  is  much  more  abundant,  yet,  it  can  not  be  said  to  be 
very  plentiful,  even  in  this  section.  It  consists  principally  of  elk,  ante- 
lope, deer,  wolves,  bear,  foxes,  martens,  muskrals,  beavers,  otters  and 
seals.  In  the  southern  part  of  this  section,  several  kinds  of  game,  are 
very  plentiful,  especially,  the  deer,  elk,  antelope  and  the  bear.  In  many 
parts  of  this  section  also,  the  fur-bearing  animals,  are  very  numerous,  but, 
they  are  by  no  means,  as  numerous  now,  as  they  formerly  were ;  and  it 
is  said,  that  tliey  are  annually  decreasing,  because  of  their  being  taken, 
without  regard  to  the  proper  season.  The  decrease  has  been  so  great,  in 
fact,  that  several  of  the  trading  posts,  of  the  Hudson'sBay  Company,  have 
been  abandoned,  as  they  did  not  defray  expenses.  Whenever  that  com- 
pany, however,  has  had  the  entire  control  of  the  trade,  the  decrease  has 
been  much  less  perceptible;  as  the  trappers  of  that  company,  are  required 
to  trap,  Avith  strict  regard  to  the  proper  season ;  and  to  observe  every 
particular  circumstance,  which  may  tend  to  prevent,  a  diminution  of  the 
fur-bearing  animals.  In  that  part  of  this  section,  where  the  settlements 
are  now  being  made,  by  our  citizens,  deer  and  wolves  are  the  most  nu- 
merous game,  of  the  quadruped  kind.  The  latter  of  these  animals,  are 
very  numerous,  and  troublesome  to  the  surrounding  setflers,  among  whom 
they  make  frequent  incursions,  destroying  their  sheep,  hogs,  and  even 
young  calves,  in  great  numbers.     In  addition  to  the  game  before  referred 


d 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  49 

to,  all  the  various  rivers  of  this  section,  abound  with  innumerable  flocks, 
of  geese,  clucks,  brants,  cranes,  pelicans,  swans,  gulls,  and  a  great  variety 
of  other  water-fowls.  Besides  these,  there  arc  numerous  other  feathered 
animals,  such  as  hawks,  eagles,  ravens,  thrushes,  pheasants,  woodpeck- 
ers, partridges,  grouses,  snowbirds  and  robins.  Robins  are  very  seldom 
found  in  the  northern  part  of  this  section,  but,  are  numerous  in  the  south- 
ern part,  as  are  also  bluebirds,  and  several  other  birds  common  in  the 
States.  The  water-fowls,  above  enumerated,  are  very  numerous,  in  the 
spring  and  autumn,  when  they  appear  to  have  congregated,  from  all  the 
surrounding  country,  and  from  their  incessant  croacking,  squeaking  and 
flapping  of  wings,  you  would  be  inclined  to  think,  that  they  were  con- 
vened, in  sporting  convention,  from  all  parts  of  the  world.  So  numerous 
are  they,  in  fact,  that  their  tumultuous  croaking,  and  plunging  and  dash- 
ing in  the  water  is,  in  many  places,  noisome  in  the  extreme.  It  is  scarce- 
ly necessary  here  to  remark,  that  it  is  entirely  unnecessary,  for  em- 
igrants to  take  either  beds  or  feathers,  from  the  states  to  that  country. 
Feathers  of  the  best  quality,  can  be  obtained  from  the  Indians,  in  any  de- 
sired quantities,  for  any  trivial  compensation. 

The  settlements  and  improvements  in  Oregon,  are  principally  confined 
to  the  forts  of  the  Hudson's  BayCompany,  and  the  missionary  stations,  in 
the  different   sections.     But  besides  these,  there  are  several  other  settle- 
ments, as  well  as    ^owns,  and  other  improvements,  latterly  commenced, 
in  various  sections  of  the  country,  which  are  disconnected,  with  the  forts 
and  missions ;  all  of  which,  will  now  be  noticed   in  successive  order. 
These  small  settlements,  called  forts,  are  mere  trading  posts,  established 
for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  trade,  with  the  various   tribes  of  Indians, 
and  are  now,  all  possessed  and  occupied  by  the  Hudson's  BayCompany,  for 
that  purpose.     In  all,  there  are  eighteen  of  these,  two  of  which  are  situa- 
ted in  the  Eastern  section ;  eight  in  the  Middle  section ;  and  eight  in  the 
Western  section.     Instead  of  describing  each  of  them  particularly,  I  shall 
merely  give  a  description,  of  one  of  the  principal  of  them,  in  each  sec- 
tion ;  and  give  the  locality  of  each  of  the  others,  which,  it  is  believed,  will  be 
found  sufficient,  for  all   the  ordinary  purposes,  of  the   emigrant.     The 
most  important  of  these  posts,  found  in  the  Eastern  section,  is  Fort  Hall, 
which  is  situated  on  the  Lewis'  or  Saptin  river,  about  sixty  miles,  west 
by  north,  from  the  soda  springs,  and  near  latitude  42°  30'  north.     It  was 
constructed  by  captain  Wythe,  of  Boston,  in  the  year  1832,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  prosecuting  trade,  with  the  various  tribes  of  Indians,  found  in  that 
region.     It  is  now  owned  bythe  Hudson'sBay  Company,  who  purchased 
it  of  captain  Wythe,  and  who  is  now  carrying  on  a  very  extensive  busi- 
ness at  that  place,  in  the  fur  trade.     This  fort  consists  of  a  small  extent 
of  ground,  inclosed  by  a  wall  of  about  sixteen  feet  in  height,  and  three  in 
thickness,  which  is  constructed  of  "adobies,"  or  large  dried  brick,  with 
bastions  at  the  corners,  which  command  each  side.     Within  this  inclo- 
sure,  are  the  residences  of  the  different  officers,  and  mechanics,  as  well 
as  the  various  offi(ies,  shops  and  store-houses.     Mr.  Grant,  who   is  in 
charge,  at  this  place,  and  of  whom  I  have  before  spoken,  has  at  his  com- 
mand, and  under  his  control,  about  sixty  Canadians  and  half-breeds,  who 
serve  the  company  as  trappers,  herdsmen  and  domestic  servants.     Large 
numbers  of  horses  and  cattle  are  reared  at  this  fort,  which  are  protected 
from  the  incursions  of  the,  Indians,  by  an  inclosure  of  high  walls,  con- 


60  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

structed  in  a  manner  similar  to  those  of  the  fort.     This  inclosure,  is 
;alled  a  "  caral,"  and  is  designed  not  only  for  the  protection  of  the  horses 
(i^  at  night,  at  which  time  they  are  regularly  driven  in,  but  also  upon  the  ap- 

proach of  hostile  and  thievish  Indians. 
V  In  addition  to  these  securities,  herdsmen  are  constantly  kept  out,   who 

^  repel  all  inferior  forces,  and  give  timely  notice  of  that  wliich  is  superior. 

With  this  kind  of  expensive  procaution,  the  company  is  enabled  to  rear 
any  requisite  number  of  either  horses  or  cattle,  and  that  too,  without  the 
expense  of  feeding  or  housing.  Several  kinds  of  grain  and  vegetables, 
are  produced  here,  with  ordinary  success,  though  the  company  has  not, 
so  far,  been  able  to  grow  sufficient  grain  and  vegetables  for  the  consump- 
tion of  the  post,  yet  this  may  be  attributable  to  defective  cultivation.  The 
remaining  fort,  in  this  section,  which  belongs  to  the  Hudson's  Bay  Com- 
*^  pany,  is  Kutanie,  which  is  situated  on  Flat-bow  river,  about  one  hundred 

and  fifty  miles  from  its  mouth.  It  is  constructed  much  like  Fort  Hall, 
and  is  kept  up,  and  conducted,  in  a  similar  manner,  and  for  similar  pur- 
poses. Fort  Boisia,  is  also]situated  in  this  section,  and  although  aban- 
doned, by  the  company,  it  is  still  kept  up,  and  occupied  by  a  Mr.  Payette, 

^^^  who  occupies  it  for  the  purpose  of  trade  v.'ith  the  Indians.     This  Fort  is 

situated  in  the  midst  of  this  section,  on   the  north  side  of  Lewis' river, 

about  forty  rods  from  its  northern  bank.     It  is  constructed  much  like 

those  just  mentioned,  but  is  the  seat  of  a  much  more  limited  business,  than 

^'  either  of  those  above  described. 

Fort  Wallawalla  is  the  principal  establishment  of  this  kind,  in  the  Mid- 
dle section.  It  is  sicuated  on  the  south  side  of  the  Columbia  river,  within 
a  few  rods  of  its  bank,  at  latitude  45  deg.  north.     From  the  central  posi- 

k  tion  of  this  fort,  in  reference  to  those  on  the  coast,  and  in  the  interior,  it 

is  m^ade  the  great  depot,  for  all  those  in  the  more  remote  and  mountainous 
regions.  An  extensive  trade  is  here  carried  on,  with  the  surrounding 
tribes  of  Indians,  and  herds  of  horses  and  cattle  are  also  here  reared,  in 
such  numbers  as  to  afford  ample  supplies  of  both,  to  many  of  the  interior 
posts.     Grain  and  vegetables  are  also  grown  at  this  fort,  in  sufficient 

^  quantities  for  the  consumption  of  the  post.     This  fort  is  constructed  in  a 

manner,  quite  similar,  to  Fort  Hall,  though  it  is  much  less  extensive. 
Fort  Okanagan,  is  situated  on  the  Columbia  river,  about  two  hundred 
miles  above  Wallawalla,  and  near  latitude  48  deg.  north.     Fort  Cole- 
ville  is  also  on  the  Columbia,  about  one  hundred  miles  above  Okanagan. 
It  is  situated,  in  the  midst  of  a  beautiful  and  fertile  plain,  where  an  abun-     : 
dance  of  grain  and  vegetables  are  grown,  and  herds  of  cattle  and  horses     I 
are  reared.     The  remaining  five  forts  of  this  section,  are  Alexandria,     ! 
cr>'        Barbine,  St.  James,  Kamloops,  and  Chilcothin,  all  of  which,  are  situated     1 
upon  Frasier's  river,  and  its  tributaries.     These  are  all  constructed  upon 
a  plan,  similar  to  that  of  those  before  described,  but,  upon  a  scale  more  or 
less  extensive,  as  the  business  in  the  portion  of  the  country  in  which  they    i 
are  situated,  seems  to  demand.  J 

Of  the  forts  of  the  Western  section,  Vancouver  is,  by  far,  the  most  im- 
portant, as  it  is  the  great  depot  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  for  all  that 
region  of  country  west  of  the  Rocky  mountains.  It  is  located  on  the 
north  side  of  the  Columbia  river,  about  eighty  rods  from  its  north  bank, 
and  ninety  miles  from  the  ocean,  at  latitude  45  deg.  30  min.  north,  and 
longitude  122  deg.  30  min.  west.  It  was  established  in  the  year  1824, 
[jy  Governor  Simpson^  aiid  was  designed  as  the  great  commercial  dcpot^ 


TO  OREGON  A^D  CALIFORNIA.  51 

of  that  herculean  company.  This  fort  is  about  fifty  rods  in  length,  and 
thirty  in  width,  and  is  inclosed  by  a  palisade,  which  is  about  eighteen 
feet  nigh,  with  bastions  at  the  corners.  Within  this  inclosure,  are  about 
forty  cheaply  constructed  buildings,  which  are  occupied  as  dwelling 
houses,  offices,  store-houses,  shops  and  lodging  apartments.  Within  this 
fort,  you  see  nothing  but  stirring  activity,  and  the  most  persevering  indus- 
try ;  officers,  clerks,  mechanics  and  servants,  are  always  to  be  seen  con- 
stantly passing  and  re-passing,  each  intent  upon  the  prompt  and  eftcient 
discharge,  of  his  individual  duty;  which,  together  with  the  diligent  and 
incessant  plying  of  the  hammers,  sledges  and  axes,  and  the  confused  toll- 
ing and  ringing  of  bells,  present  all  the  impetuous  commotion,  rustling, 
tumultuous  din  and  rumbling  of  a  city  life,  in  the  oriental  world. 

Dr.  McLoughlin,  who  is  chief  factor  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company, 
west  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  is  in  charge.  He  is  courteous,  intelligent 
and  companionable,  and  a  more  kind,  hospitable  and  liberal  gentleman,  the 
world  never  saw.  Every  possible  attention,  kindness  and  hospitality  are 
extended  to  all  those  who  visit  him,  either  upon  business  or  otherwise ; 
some  of  whom  he  invites  to  his  own  table,  where  they  are  treated  with  all 
the  courtesy  and  etiquette  of  English  refinement.  For  all  others,  a 
spacious  apartment  is  provided,  which  is  called  the  "bachelor's  hall,"  and 
which,  contains  a  convenient  sitting  room,  a  dining  room,  and  several 
comfortable  lodging  apartments,  all  of  which,  are  provided  expressly  for 
those  who  are  not  invited  to  his  private  table.  Those  who  occupy  the 
"bachelor's  hall,"  are  also  furnished  with  all  the  luxuries  of  the  fort; 
servants  are  in  readiness  to  give  them  any  attention,  and,  although  they 
remain  for  weeks,  or  even  months  together,  as  many  have,  the  kindness, 
attention  and  hospitality  of  the  doctor,  are  still,  unremittingly  bestowed. 
But  the  kindness  and  hospitality  of  this  gentleman,  do  not  end  here,  for 
when  his  guests  wish  to  return  to  their  homes,  a  cart  with  servants,  is 
sent,  to  convey  their  baggage  or  goods  to  the  river;  and  all  this  too,  with- 
out promise  or  hope  of  reward.  A  Mr.  James  Douglass,  who  is  occa- 
sionally in  charge  of  this  fort,  in  the  absence  of  the  doctor,  is  also  an  in- 
telligent gentleman,  and  is  alike  courteous,  kind  and  hospitable  as  the 
doctor.  This  gentleman  is  now,  in  charge  of  a  fort,  which  the  company 
was  building,  when  I  left  that  country.  About  one  hundred  rods  below 
Fort  Vancouver,  and  near  the  river,  is  the  village,  which  is  connected 
with  the  fort,  and  which  consists  of  about  fifty  small  and  cheaply  con- 
structed buildings,  which  are  occupied  by  the  servants  of  the  company. 
In  connection  with  this  fort,  there  is  also,  a  very  large  farm,  consisting  of 
about  three  thousand  acres  of  land  under  fence;  the  cultivating  of  which, 
gives  constant  employment  to  about  one  hundred  hands,  who  are  gene- 
rally, half-breeds  and  Indians.  Near  the  fort  also,  are  a  saw  and  flouring 
mill,  both  of  which,  run  day  and  night,  during  the  entire  year,  and  hence, 
do  a  most  extensive  business.  This  site  has  been  well  selected,  in  refer- 
ence to  the  future  improvements  of  the  country  ;  and  I  am  of  the  opinion, 
that  it  is  much  the  best  site  for  a  town  or  city,  to  be  found  upon  the  Col- 
umbia; and  I  am  of  the  further  opinion  too,  that  the  time  is  not  distant, 
when  the  present  site  of  Vancouver,  will  be  occupied  by  a  great  com- 
mercial city. 

Fort  George  is  situated,  on  the  south  side  .of  the  Columbia,  upon  the 
hill  side,  near  the  river,  but  a  few  miles  from  the  mouth,  and  near  lati- 
tude 46  deg.  north.     The  buildings  of  this  tort,  consist  of  three  small 


52  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

log -houses,  which  are  occupied  by  persons  in  the  service  of  the  company, 
for  the  purpose  of  trade  with  the  Indians,  and  also  for  the  purpose  of 
keeping  the  officers  of  Fort  Vancouver,  duly  advised  of  the  arrival  of 
ships,  and  such  other  occurrences  as  may  be  deemed  important.  The 
only  importance  which  is  now  attached  to  this  fort,  is  derived  from  the 
fact,  of  its  being  the  former  site  of  Astoria ;  the  establishment  of  John 
Jacob  Astor,  of  New  York,  which  was  made  in  the  year  1811  ;  taken 
possession  of  by  the  British,  as  an  act  of  war,  during  the  war  of  1812; 
and  restored  to  the  United  States  in  1818,  in  accordance  with  the  treaty 
of  Ghent.  Nothing  now  remains  of  Astoria,  but  a  few  remnants  of  the 
old  palisade,  scarely  sufficient  to  identify  the  seat  of  that  great  enterprise; 
the  classic  narrative  in  reference  to  which,  has  spread  the  name  and  fame, 
of  both  John  Jacob  Astor,  and  Washington  Irving,  wherever  the  En- 
glish language  is  read.  The  importance  of  the  remaining  forts,  of  this 
section,  will  not  warrant  a  minute  description  of  each ;  I  shall  therefore, 
merely  give  their  respective  locality.  Fort  Simpson  is  situated  on  Dun- 
das  island,  at  latitude  54  deg.  20  min.  north.  Fort  McLoughlin  is  on  Mill- 
bank  sound,  near  latitude  52  deg.  north.  Fort  Langley  is  at  the  outlet  of 
Frasier's  river,  near  latitude  49  deg.  25  min.  north.  Furt  Nisqually  is 
situated  at  latitude  47  deg.  north,  near  Pugets'  sound.  Fort  Cawlitz  is  on 
the  Cawlitz  river,  about  thirty  miles  from  the  Columbia,  and  near  latitude 
46  deg.  40  min.  north.  The  only  remaining  fort  of  this  section  is  Fort 
Umpqua,  which  is  situated  at  the  mouth  of  the  Umpqua  river,  at  latitude 
43  deg.  30  min.  north,  and  longitude  124  deg.  west.  These  are  all  con- 
structed much  like  Fort  Vancouver,  but  they  are  much  less  extensive,  yet, 
they  are  generally,  seats  of  extensive  and  lucrative  trade.  Besides  the 
improvements  in  connection  with  Fort  Vancouver,  the  company  also  has 
very  extensive  farms  at  the  Cawlitz,  Nisqually,  Langley  and  the  Fuali- 
tine  plains.  At  each  of  these  considerable  grain  is  grown,  and  many 
horses  and  cattle  are  reared.  That  at  Nisqually,  is  more  particularly 
designed  as  a  grazing  farm,  to  which  purpose,  it  is  eminently  adapted. 
Upon  this  farm,  the  company  keeps  about  eighty  milk  cows;  has  an  ex- 
tensive dairy,  and  make  both  butter  and  cheese,  not  only  in  quantities  suf- 
ficient for  home  consumption,  but  it  also  makes  much  for  exportation. 
The  farm  at  the  Cawlitz,  is  a  most  beautiful  place,  containing  about  six 
hundred  acres,  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation,  which  yield  both  vegeta- 
bles and  various  kinds  of  grain,  in  great  abundance.  At  the  Fualitine 
plains  also,  grain  and  vegetables  grow  most  luxuriantly,  and  produce 
abundantly.  The  foregoing  is  but  a  faint  exhibit  of  the  power,  and  the 
agricultural  and  commercial  resources,  of  this  great  heremitical  company. 
Since  it  is  true,  as  above  seen,  that  this  gigantic  company,  of  British 
ubjects,  holds  the  almost  entire  control,  not  only  of  the  trade,  but  also  of 
the  agricultural  and  commercial  resources,  of  all  Oregon,  a  brief  descrip- 
tion of  that  company,  may  not  be  deemed  inappropriate.  This  great 
company,  was  created  in  the  year  1 670,  during  the  reign  of  Charles  II,  by  a 
charter  which  was  granted  to  certain  British  subjects,  under  the  name  and 
style  of  the  Hudsons'BayCompany.  This  Company  was  created,  with 
the  view  of  carrying  on  the  fur  trade  in  Oregon,  where  it  soon  established, 
and  held  the  uninterrupted  control  of  the  entire  trade,  of  all  thatcountry,  until 
the  year  1787,  when  the  North  American  Fur  Company  was  chartered. 
This  Company  also  established  in  Oregon,  and  commenced  a  very  ex- 
tensive trade,  throughout  the  different  portions  of  that  country ;  but  it 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  63 

soon  came  in  competition  and  coalition  with  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company, 
which  gave  rise  to  many  serious  difficulties.  The  attention  of  the  Brit- 
ish government  was  soon  directed  to  these  companies,  and  as  there  was 
no  probability  of  reconciliation,  an  act  of  parliamant  was  passed,  uniting 
the  two  companies,  under  the  name  and  style  of  the  Hudson'sBayCom- 
pany,  under  which  name  it  has  continued  its  operations,  up  to  the  present 
time,  wielding  an  almost  unbounded  trade,  with  unparalleled  success.  The 
officers  of  this  company,  as  now  organized,  consists  of  a  governor  gener- 
al, chief  factors  and  chief  traders.  The  governor  general  has  charge  of 
all  the  different  trading  posts  or  forts,  in  North  America,  and  for  that  pur- 
pose resides  at  York  Factory,  on  Hudson's  Bay.  The  chief  factors  have 
the  control  of  a  certain  number  of  forts  or  trading  posts,  within  a  certain 
district,  or  section  of  country,  subject  however,  to  the  general  superin- 
tendence of  the  governor  general.  The  chief  traders  also  have  control 
of  a  certain  number  of  trading  posts,  within  a  particular  district,  being 
subject  to  the  superintendence  of  the  chief  factors.  Thus,  we  have  briefly 
noticed,  the  origin,  and  the  present  organization,  of  that  powerful  compa- 
ny, which  has,  so  entirely,  wielded  the  destinies  of  Oregon,  for  more  than 
half  of  a  century. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

A  DESCRIPTION  OF  OREGON. 

Missionary  stations;  number  of;  description  of .  Br.  Whitman's  station. 
Station  at  the  dalles .  Settlements  and,  improvements.  Those  at  the  Wal- 
lammette  valley  ;  at  theFualitine  plains ;  at  the  Wallammelte  falls.  Oregon 
city.  Linnton.  Kind  of  buildings.  Mills ;  number  of  Water  power. 
Roads,  Printing-press.  Steam-engine.  Popnlatinn ;  fiumberoj;  des- 
criptioTi.  of;  Use  of  ardent  spirits  prohibited.  Hospitable  reception  of  em.- 
igrants.  Moral  improvement.  Oregon  emigrants ;  peculiar  character 
of  Indians;  number  of  ;  where  fotind.  Of  Eastern  section.  Black  feet  ; 
hostility  of  Shoshonies  and  Bonarks  ;  said  to  be  '"friendly  ;''^  thievish 
disposition  of  Of  the  Middle  section.  Skiuseand  Nezpemies  ;  adroitness 
in  horse  trading;  their  horses;  superior  (pialify  (f;  vast  nundjers  of; 
their  thievery.  Those  of  the  Western  section  ;  their  m.eans  of  sustenance  ; 
mode  of  constructing  huts  ;  their  service  to  settlers  ;  their  friendly  dispo- 
sition ;  their  thievish  propensities.  Government ;  organization  of;  de- 
sign of  Laws  of  Iowa  adopted.  Biitish  subjects  not  subject  to. 
Laws  of  Canada  adopted.  Conflicting  jurisdictions.  Right  of  U.  S.  to 
extend  their  jurisdiction  over  Oregon.     Markci      Trade.     Commerce. 

The  various  missionary  stations,  together  with  the  improvements  in 
connection  with  them,  next  deserve  our  attention,  in  describing  which,  I 
shall  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  confine  m)^  remarks  chiefly,  to  the  more  impor- 
tant stations.  In  all  there  are  eiglit  stations  in  Oregon,  four  of  which, 
are  in  the  Middle  section,  and  four  in  the  Western  section.  There  was, 
also  a  station,  formerly,  in  the  Eastern  section,  but  it  is  now  abandoned. 
This  station  was  called  Kaima,  and  was  situated  on  Koosekooseke  riv^er,in 


64  THE   EMIGRANTS'    GUIDE 

the  vicinity  of  Fort  Boisia.  The  principal  station  found  in  the  Middle 
section,  is  a  presbyterian  station,  which  is  situated  on  the  Wallawalla  riv- 
er, about  twenty-five  miles  easterly  from  Fort  Wallawalla.  This  is  the 
station,  to  which  I  have  alluded  upon  another  page,  as  being  under  the  su- 
perintendence of  Dr.  Whitman,  and  which  is  called  Dr.  Whitman's  mis- 
sion. At  this  station,  there  is  a  very  large  farm,  under  a  good  state  of  cul- 
tivation, which  produces  a  great  abundance  of  both  grain  and  vegetables. 
The  buildings  are  very  convenient,  consisting  of  two  large  dwelling-houses, 
one  of  which,  was  not  entirely  completed,  when  I  was  at  that  place.  The 
walls  of  these  buildings,  are  constructed  of  "adobies,"  or  large  dried 
brick.  In  connection  with  these,  there  is  also,  a  flouring- mill,  which 
answers  all  the  purposes  of  the  missionaries,  and  the  dependent  natives. 
Near  this  mill,  there  is  also,  a  large  "  caral,"  or  inclosure,  into 
which,  the  cattle  and  horses  are  daily  driven,  as  at  Fort  Hall,  and  else- 
where, througliout  this  region.  Large  numbers  of  American  cattle,  and 
Skiuse,  and  Wallawalla  horses,  are  reared  at  this  place,  and  they  all  thrive 
most  admirably,  notwithstanding  the  inclement  winters,  of  this  excessively 
cold  region.  There  are  two  other  stations,  at  the  east,  and  north  of  this, 
called  the  Lapwai  and  the  Chimekaine  stations ;  but  the  only  remaining 
station  of  this  section,  which  I  shall  more  particularly  notice,  is  that  at  the 
dalles,  which  is  situated  about  a  mile  from  the  Columbia  river,  on  the 
south  side,  upon  the  adjacent  high  lands,  just  below  the  dalles.  Between 
this  station  and  the  river,  is  a  most  beautiful  and  fertile  valley,  on  which, 
herds  of  fine  cattle  and  horses,  belonging  to  the  missionaries,  are  always 
to  be  seen  grazing,  in  great  numbers.  The  buildings  of  this  station,  con- 
sist of  a  dwelling-house,  a  school-house,  workshops  and  several  out- 
houses. This  is  a  beautiful  station,  and  the  missionaries  here  appear  to 
be  in  very  comfortable  circumstances.  There  is  not  a  very  extensive 
tract  of  land,  under  cultivation,  in  connection  with  this  station,  but  both 
grain  and  vegetables,  are  grown  in  sufficient  quantities,  for  the  consump- 
tion of  the  missionaries,  and  the  natives  in  their  service.  The  missiona- 
ries of  all  this  section,  and  especially,  those  at  the  presbyterian  stations, 
are  laboring  with  much  success,  both  in  christianizing,  and  civilizing  the 
natives.  Agricultural  pursuits,  have  already  been  introduced  among  them, 
to  a  very  considerable  extent ;  and  many  of  them,  even  now,  grow  con- 
siderable grain,  rear  large  herds,  build  houses  ;  and  in  fact,  exhibit  an  ex- 
traordinary advancement  in  civiHzation,  considering  the  brief  duration  of 
missionary  labors  in  that  region. 

The  missionary  stations  of  the  W^estern  section,  are  located  at  the  Wal- 
lammette  valley,  the  Wallammette  fails ,  Clatsop  and  Nisquaily. 
That  station  situated  in  the  Wallammette  valley,  is  the  principal  and  most 
important  station  of  this  section.  It  it  is  situated  about  fifty  miles  above 
the  falls,  a  few  miles  east  of  the  Wallammette  river,  where  the  buildings 
in  connection  with  the  station,  consist  of  dwelling-houses,  barns,  shops, 
store-houses,  churches,  school-houses  and  mills.  In  all,  there  are  about 
fourteen  buildings,  belonging  to  this  station,  which  are  located  at  different 
points  in  this  valley,  varying  from  one  to  eight  miles  in  distance,  from 
each  other.  At  the  Indian  school,  thirty  or  forty  Indian  children,  are 
now  being  taught  the  rudiments  of  the  English  language,  with  a  view  of 
facilitating  the  promulgation  of  the  doctrines  of  the  christian  religion. 
There  are  also  two  large  farms,  in  connection  with  this  station,  which  are 
very  extensive,  and  which  produce  ample  grain  and  vegetables,  foi  the- 


i  TO   OREGON  AND   CALIFORNIA.  65 

!  consumption  of  all  the  different  stations  of  this  section,  as  well  as  much 
I  grain  for  exportation.  Here  too,  cattle,  horses,  sheep  and  hogs,  are  rear- 
i  ed  in  much  greater  numbers,  than  at  any  of  the  other  stations.  There  is 
'  also  a  store,  connected  with  this  station,  where  goods  are  annually  sold, 
'  both  to  the  settlers,  and  the  Indians,  to  the  amount  of  several  thousand 
!  dollars.  The  Rev.  Jason  Lee  is  in  charge  at  this  station,  and  is  the  gen- 
;  eral  superintendent,  of  all  the  Methodist  missionary  stations  in  Oregon. 
I  He  is  gentlemanly,  kind  and  hospitable,  and  with  all,  a  very  energetic 
!  and  enterprising  man.  He  extends  great  kindness  and  hospitality,  to  the 
{  numerous  emigrants,  who  are  constantly  arriving  in  that  country.  The 
i  station  at  the  falls,  is  situated  but  a  few  rods  below  the  catarL*ct ;  the  build- 
j  ings  consist  of  two  dwelling-houses,  a  store-house  and  a  ware-house.  At  this 
;  place  also,  as  at  the  valley,  there  is  a  store,  at  which  large  quantities  of 
i  goods  are  daily  sold,  by  the  missionaries,  to  both  whites  and  Indians, 
from  which  extensive  profits  are  annually  derived.  The  Indians  in  the 
vicinity  of  this  station,  are  occasionally  convened,  either  at  the  falls,  or 
the  Klackamus,  for  the  purpose  of  religious  instruction ;  but  it  appears 
to  be  with  the  greatest  reluctance,  that  they  assemble,  upon  such  occa- 
sions. The  stations  at  Nisqually  and  Clatsop,  are  much  less  important, 
than  those  just  described,  as  there  are  but  a  very  few  missionaries  sta- 
tioned at  each,  merely  for  the  purpose  of  imparting  religious  instruction 
to  the  few  Indians,  who  are  connected  with  each  station.  Nor  is  there 
any  additional  settlements  of  whites,  in  connection  with  either  of  these 
stations,  which  will  enable  the  missionaries,  to  extend  their  labors  among 
them,  as  religious  teachers.  At  both  of  these  stations,  grain  and  vege- 
tables are  grown,  to  some  extent,  and  cattle  and  horses  are  reared  in  num- 
bers sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  the  stations.  Although  the  station  at 
the  falls,  may  have  been,  and  may  at  this  time  be,  of  some  importance,  as 
a  means  of  imparting  religious  instruction,  to  the  natives,  yet  the  time  is 
not  far  distant,  when  it  can  be  of  no  further  importance,  in  that  respect; 
for  it  is  evident,  from  the  importance  of  that  point,  for  manufacturing  and 
commercial  purposes,  that  the  Indians  will  not  be  permitted, long  to  re- 
main either  there,  or  in  the  immediate  vicinity.  And  my  impression  is, 
that  none  of  those  missionary  establishments,  can  long  exist,  as  such,  in 
that  part  of  the  Western  section  ;  for  there  are  but  very  few  Indians,  in  the 
immediate  neighborhood,  of  any  of  these  stations,  to  require  the  attention 
of  missionaries.  And,  as  that  is  far  the  most  fertile,  and  delightful  por- 
tion of  Oregon,  which  is  as  yet  occupied,  it  is  very  evident,  that  the  na- 
tives will,  in  a  very  few  years,  at  farthest,  be  required  to  change  their 
locations. 

The  settlements  and  improvements,  which  are  disconnected  with  the 
forts  and  missions,  are  chiefly  at  the  Wallammette  valley,  the  Fualitine 
plains,  and  the  Wallammette  falls.  The  settlement  at  the  Wallammette 
valley,  is  at  present,  the  most  extensive  settlement  in  the  country.  It  con- 
tains about  one  hundred  families,  who  have  extensive  farms,  and  who  are 
otherwise  comfortably  situated.  Each  of  the  farmers  in  this  valley,  gen- 
erally have,  from  one  hundred  to  five  hundred  acres  of  land  under  fence, 
and  in  a  good  state  of  cukivation,  upon  which,  they  grow  annually,  from 
five  hundred  to  a  thousand  bushels  of  wheat  for  exportation,  besides 
beans,  peas  and  potatoes,  turnips  and  various  other  vegetables,  which  they 
grow  in  great  abundance.  They  also  usually  rear  cattle,  horses,  sheep 
and  hogs,  in  large  numbers;  each  farmer  generally  having,  from  fifty  to 


56  THE   EMIGRANTS'    GUIDE 

five  hundred  head  of  cattle,  from  ten  to  one  hundred  head  of  horses,  and 
as  many  sheep  and  hogs  ;  for  all  of  which,  the  continued,  annual  emigra- 
tion, affords  an  ample  market.  In  the  Fuulitine  plains,  there  are  about 
fifty  families,  all  of  whom  have  selected,  and  are  now  improving  their 
farms.  They  generally  have  from  fifty,  to  a  hundred  acres  of  land,  un- 
der fence,  with  cattle,  horses,  hogs  and  sheep,  in  large  numbers.  The 
settlers  here,  however,  like  those  of  the  Wallammette  valley,  devote  their 
principal  attention,  to  the  growing  of  wheat,  of  which,  they  sell  annually, 
from  one  hundred  to  a  thousand  bushels,  besides  beans,  peas,  turnips,  pota- 
toes and  the  like,  for  all  of  which,  a  ready  market  is  found  in  the  coun- 
try, as  will  be  seen  upon  another  page.  The  settlement  at  the  falls,  is 
less  extensive  than  those  just  described,  but  from  its  very  favorable  situa- 
tion, it  is,  perhaps,  more  important  than  either  of  those.  In  the  winter  of 
1843,  a  town  was  laid  ofT,  near  the  falls,  which  has  since  improved,  with 
unparalleled  rapidity.  It  was  surveyed  under  my  direction,  but  at  the  ex- 
pense of  Dr.  McLoughlin,  who  claimed,  and  then  occupied  the  site,  and 
who,  after  having  surveyed  it,  for  a  mile  in  extent,  up  and  down  the  Wal- 
lammette river,  permitted  all  persons  who  wished  to  do  so,  to  take  as 
many  lots,  as  they  would  build  upon  and  improve,  requiring  them  merely 
to  pay  for  the  drawing  of  the  writings,  in  reference  to  them.  During  the 
winter,  there  were  numerous  lots  taken,  upon  these  terms,  and  in  the  fol- 
lowing spring,  there  were  thirty  buildings,  in  Oregon  City,  which  was 
the  name  given  it,  at  the  time  of  its  surveyal.  In  the  autumn  of  1843, 
there  were  fifty  three  buildings  in  this  town,  among  which,  were  four 
stores,  four  mills,  two  of  which  were  flouring  mills,  one  public-house, 
one  black  smith's  shop  and  various  other  mechanic's  shops  ;  a  church 
was  also  in  contemplation,  and  in  fact,  commenced.  Many  of  the  lots, 
which  were  obtained  gratuitously,  only  the  spring  previous,  were  then 
worth  at  least,  one  thousand  dollars  each,  and  their  value  w^is  daily  in- 
creasing, with  the  improvements  of  the  town.  Such  were  the  improve- 
ments of  Oregon  City,  in  the  autumn  of  1843,  but  about  eight  months,  af- 
ter its  emergent  appearance.  Oregon  City  is  situated  upon  a  very  favor- 
able site  for  a  town,  and  it  is,  beyond  a  doubt,  destined  to  become  a  place 
of  very  considerable  manufacturing  and  commercial  importance.  This 
opinion  is  strengthened,  when  we  take  into  consideration,  the  fact,  of  its 
being  near  the  head  of  slack-water  navigation,  and  the  fact,  of  its  pos- 
sessing a  water  power,  scarcely  ever  surpassed.  For  the  present,  and 
until  other  towns  spring  up,  emigrants  will,  in  a  great  measure,  concen- 
trate at  this  place,  especially  merchants,  mechanics  and  those  of  the  learn- 
ed professions.  But  other  towns  are  already,  springing  into  existence, 
as  additional  evidences  of  the  unbounded  energy  and  enterprise  of  Amer- 
ican citizens.  A  town  has  been  recently  laid  ofT,  upon  the  west  side  of 
the  Wallammette  river,  about  five  miles  from  its  mouth,  near  the  head  of 
sloop  navigation,  and  about  ten  miles  below  Vancouver ;  called  Linnton,  in 
honor  of  the  lamented  Dr.  Linn  of  Missouri.  This  is  also,  a  very  favora- 
ble site  for  a  town,  and  is  improving,  with  extraordinary  rapidity. 

The  improvements  of  the  settlements,  both  in  the  valley  and  plains  are 
quite  similar  to  those  in  our  western  states.  The  buildings  being  usually 
constructed  of  logs,  some  of  which  are  hewn,  and  others  round,  are  intended 
only  for  temporary  residences ;  but  many  of  them  are  very  comfortable,  and 
convenient.  There  are  some  exceptions  to  the  above  remarks,  for  there  are 
several  very  commodious, and  well-finished  framed  buildings,  both  inthe  val- 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA  »? 

ley  and  the  plains.  The  buildings  in  Oregon  City,  are,  with  a  few  excep- 
tions, framed  and  well-finished.  Including  saw  and  flouring  mills,  there  are 
now  fourteen  in  Oregon,  many  of  which,  are  doing  a  very  extensive  and 
profitable  business ;  and  there  are  innumerable  sites  for  mills  and  other 
machinery,  which  are  destined,  soon  to  be  occupied.  There  are  perhaps, 
very  few  countries  which  afibrd  more  numerous,  or  more  advantageous 
sites  for  the  most  extensive  water  power  than  Oregon.  The  people  of  this 
territory,  in  their  anxiety  to  provide  for  their  individual  necessities,  and 
to  promote  their  individual  interests,  have  paid  but  very  little  attention  to 
the  making  of  roads,  and  other  public  improvements.  Traveling  and  trans- 
portation, are,  as  yet,  chiefly  on  horseback,  and  by  water,  but  from  the 
nature  of  die  soil  however,  there  can  be  no  difliculty,  in  making  good 
roads,  and  thereby,  rendering  intercommunication  easy,  and  transporta- 
tion cheap,  throughout  all  portions  of  the  country.  The  foregoing  facts, 
in  reference  to  the  improvements  of  Oregon,  afford  a  few  evidences  of  the 
very  enterprising  character  of  the  Oregon  emigrants;  but  a  further  evi- 
dence is  found  in  the  fact  of  their  having  recently  sent  to  New  York  for 
a  printing-press  and  a  steam-engine,  which  will  be  received  sometime 
during  the  next  summer  or  autumn ;  when  the  same  energy  and  enterprise 
that  procured  them,  will  soon  put  them  into  extensive  and  successful 
operation. 

The  entire  population  of  Oregon,  may  now  be  estimated  at  about  twen- 
ty-four thousand,  including  both  whites  and  Indians,  and  the  white  pop- 
ulation, including  Canadians  and  half-breeds,  now  amounts  to  about  four 
thousand.  The  emigrants,  up  to  the  autumn  of  1844,  and  the  former 
American  settlers  inclusive,  increase  tho  Amf'rican  population  to  about 
three  thousand.  The  officers  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  the  Cana- 
dians and  half-breeds,  number  about  one  thousand;  and  hence,  it  is  seen, 
that  the  Indian  population  is  about  twenty  thousand.  The  American  pop- 
ulation, and  the  Canadians  and  half-breeds,  who  are  disconnected  with 
the  company,  are,  as  before  remarked,  chiefly  settled  at  the  falls  of  the 
Wallammette,  the  Fualitine  plain,  and  the  Wallammette  valley.  They 
are  industrious,  orderly,  and  good  citizens;  devoting  their  entire  time  and 
attention  to  the  improvement  of  their  farms,  the  growing  of  grain,  and 
rearing  of  herds;  they  all  appear  to  be  intent,  only  upon  the  advancement 
of  the  general  good.  In  every  thing  that  tends  to  the  advancement  of  the 
interests  of  the  country,  there  appears  to  be  a  hearty  co-operation,  between 
the  gentlemen  of  the  Hudson  Bay  Company,  and  the  American  citizens. 
As  one  instance  of  extraordinary,  and  entire  devotion  to  the  best  interest 
of  the  country,  the  Avhole  co  nmunity,  with  one  unanimous  voice,  deter- 
mined to  abandon  the  use  of  all  alcoholic  or  inebriating  liquors;  and  to 
prevent  their  introduction  or  sale,  under  any  state  of  circumstances.  In 
this  measure,  the  gentlemen  of  the  company  perform  a  very  efficient 
part,  and  although  their  own  store-houses  are  full  of  intoxicating  liquors, 
they  sell  none  to  any  person.  Upon  the  arrival  of  a  vessel  freighted  with 
ardent  spirits  the  doctor,  McLoughlin,  has  been  known  to  purchase  the 
whole  cargo,  in  order  to  prevent  its  sale  among  the  settlers,  when  at  the 
same  time,  he  had  hundreds  of  barrels  in  his  own  store-houses.  A  course 
equally  prompt  and  energetic,  is  also  pursued  by  the  settlers  themselves, 
as  is  seen  in  this  instance.  A  Mr.  Young,  commenced  the  erection  of  a 
distillery,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  principal  settlements,  of  which  the  settlers, 


68  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

were  all  soon  advised,  when  a  public  meeting  was  called,  for  the  purpose 
of  adopting  such  measures,  as  might  immediately  arrest  this  work  of 
death.  Upon  due  deliberation,  and  full  consideration  of  the  subject,  the 
meeting  unanimously  resolved,  that  Mr.  Young  should  be  paid  for  his 
building,  already  commenced ;  but  that  he  should  also  abandon  the  further 
prosecution  of  his  most  nefarious  purpose,  which  if  he  did  not  do,  his 
buildings  and  whatever  else  connected  with  them,  however  often  erected, 
should  as  often,  be  demolished.  This  resolution,  accompanied  by  an  ap- 
propriate preamble,  was  presented  to  Mr.  Young,  who,  after  a  few  mo- 
ments reflection,  saw  the  full  force  of  these  mandatory  admonitions,  and 
finally,  consented  to  abandon  his  unrighteous  enterprise.  This  certainly 
speaks  volumes, for  the  morality  and  intelligence  of  the  citizens  of  Oregon, 
and  it  is,  no  doubt,  the  chief  cause  of  all  that  order  and  quiet,  which  so 
universally  prevail,  throughout  all  the  different  settlements. 

A  kindness  and  hospitality  exist,  among  those  pioneers  of  the  west, 
which  is  almost  unparalleled.  Upon  the  arriral  of  emigrants,  in  the 
country,  immediate  arrangements  are  made  by  the  former  settlers,  to  pro- 
vide them  with  houses  and  provisions,  and  every  aid  is  rendered  them  in 
making  their  selections  of  lands,  and  procuring  houses  for  themselvea. 
The  doctor  McLoughlin,  also,  affords  them  every  aid  in  his  power ;  fur- 
nishing them  with  goods  and  teams,  upon  a  credit,  if  they  are  unable  to 
make  immediate  payment,  providing  them  with  wheat  for  their  bread  and 
seed,  and  receiving  wheat  the  next  year  in  payment;  and  letting  them 
have  cows  and  other  cattle,  to  be  returned  in  such  time  as  shall  be  agreed 
upon,  with  a  portion  of  the  increase.  This  kindness  and  generosity  of 
the  doctor,  are  not  confined  to  emigrants  upon  their  arrival  merely,  but 
they  are  extended  to  every  settler,  and  respectable  inhabitant,  in  all  the 
various  portions  of  the  country.  Schools  and  churches  are  already, 
established  throughout  the  country,  and  unlike  all  other  new  coun- 
tries, a  very  great  anxiety  prevails,  for  the  speedy  promotion,  of  the 
moral  and  intellectual  improvement,  of  the  rising  generation,  as  a  consid- 
eration, of  high  and  paramount  importance.  Divine  service  is  regularly 
attended,  in  every  inhabited  portion  of  the  country,  at  least,  once  or  twice 
each  week,  upon  which  occasions,  sermons  are  delivered  by  the  clergy- 
men, of  the  varaious  christian  denominations.  In  point  of  morality,  and 
virtue,  this  little  community,  loses  nothing,  by  a  comparison  with  any 
comnmnity,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Rocky  mountains.  Mechanics  of  all 
kinds,  and  men  of  all  the  learned  professions,  are  even  now,  to  be  found 
in  Oregon,  and  for  so  limited  a  population,  there  is  a  very  fair  proportion 
of  talent  and  learning.  And  I  may  add,  that  the  Oregon  emigrants  are, 
as  a  general  thing,  of  a  superior  order  to  those  of  our  people,  who  usually 
emigrate  to  our  frontier  countries.  They  are  not  the  indolent,  dissolute, 
ignorant  and  vicious,  but  they  are  generally,  the  enterprising,  orderly, 
intelligent  and  virtuous. 

There  are  several  powerful  and  warlike  tribes  of  Indians,  occupying 
each  of  the  different  sections.  The  principal  tribes  inhabiting  the  Eastern 
section,  are  the  Shoshonies,  or  Snakes,  the  Black-feet,  and  the  Bonarks. 
The  Nezpercies  also  frequent  this  section,  but  their  country  is  properly 
in  the  Middle  section,  where  they  are  principally  found.  The  Indians  of 
this  section  are  much  less  advanced  in  civilization,  than  those  of  the  other 
sections.  They  are  all  said  to  be  friendly,  excepting  the  Black-feet,  who 
have  always  been  hostile.     Emigrants,  however,  very  seldom  meet  with 


TO    OREGON   AND    CALIFORNIA.  50 

them,  in  traveling  to  Oregon,  by  the  way  of  Fort  Hall,  as  their  country 
lies  far  to  the  north  of  that  route.  They  are  not  to  be  dreaded,  however, 
when  met  by  a  large  party  of  whites ;  even  forty  or  fifty  armed  men,  are 
ample  to  deter  them  from 'any  hostile  movements.  They  should  always 
be  considered,  and  treated  as  enemies,  whatever  may  be  their  pretensions 
of  friendship.  The  Shoshonies  or  Snakes,  the  "Root-diggers,"  (a  lower 
order  of  the  same  tribe,)  and  the  Bonarks,  although  said  to  be  friendly, 
are,  in  fact,  not  strictly  so,  in  the  sense  in  which  that  term  is  used  in  civ- 
ilized life.  The  word  "friendly,"  as  used  by  mountaineers,  in  reference 
to  the  Indians,  only  implies  that  they  are  not  arrayed,  in  armed  and  hostile 
opposition  to  the  whites ;  that  they  are  not  actually  seeking  their  indis- 
criminate destruction.  This  is  a  Rocky  mountain  definition,  of  the  word 
''friendly."  However  "friendly"  these  Indians  may  be,  they  seek  every 
possible  opportunity,  to  steal  your  horses,  and  every  thing  else  upon 
which  they  can  lay  their  hands,  and  they  avail  themselves  of  every  favor- 
able occasion,  for  forcibly  taking  from  you,  every  thing  that  you  possess, 
which  they  chance  to  desire  or  admire.  There  is  no  exception  to  this, 
only  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of  the  various  forts,  where  they  are 
held  in  awe  by  superior  force.  At  these  places,  they  appear  to  be  in^ 
clined  to  accomplish  their  thievish  purposes,  with  much  more  caution, 
and  upon  a  much  more  limited  system.  Petit  larceny  is  the  most  com- 
mon ofl!ence  committed  at  these  places,  while  grand  larceny,  and  robbery 
are  constantly  being  committed  by  them  elsewhere  ;  but  as  they  are  "friend- 
ly," murder  is  an  offence  which  they  seldom  commit. 

The  principal  tribes  of  the  Middle  section,  are  the  Nezpercies,  Skyu- 
ses,  Wallawallas  and  Chenukes.  The  first  of  these  tribes,  here  mention- 
ed, rear  large  numbers  of  horses,  and  some  cattle,  and  they  are  notorious, 
not  only  for  horse-trading,  but  for  horse-stealing.  The  Nazpercies  rear 
a  much  the  greater  number  of  horses,  than  any  other  tribe  in  Oregon ;  I 
was  informed,  that  one  Nezpercie  chief,  had  eleven  thousand  of  fine 
horses  ;  this  number,  however,  I  suppose  was  perhaps,  rather  exaggera- 
ted. The  best  horses  that  I  have  ever  seen,  I  saw  among  the  Nezpesie, 
the  Skyuse  and  Wallawalla  tribes.  The  horses  of  these  tribes,  diflfer 
very  much  from  those  of  the  various  other  tribes;  they  are  large,  well 
proportioned,  and  extremely  fleet  and  hardy.  The  Chonukes  also,  have 
some  horses,  but  very  few,  in  comparison  to  those  of  the  tribes  just  men- 
tioned. Many  of  these  Indians,  grow  a  small  kind  of  corn,  and  potatoes 
and  melons,  in  considerable  quantities,  which  are  grown  by  some  for 
food,  and  by  others  for  the  purpose  of  barter  with  the  Indians  of  the 
E;istern  section,  for  which  they  receive  buffalo  robes  and  meat  in  exchange. 
The  women  have  been  taught,  by  the  missionaries,  to  spin,  weave  and 
knit,  in  which  manner,  many  of  them,  employ  much  of  their  time,  when 
their  services  are  not  required  in  the  fields.  They  are  also  entirely 
*'  friendly,"  that  is,  they  are  not  inclined  to  take  your  life,  if  they  can  ac- 
complish all  of  their  thievish  purposes  without.  But  a  more  villainous 
and  treacherous  race  of  thieves,  can  scarcely  be  found.  Notwithstand- 
ing all  the  religious  instruction,  which  they  are  daily  receiving,  and  the 
moral  influence,  which  is  hourly  exerted  among  them,  they  will  unhesita- 
tingly, steal  your  knives,  forks,  plates,  cups,  horses,  or  any  thing  else, 
whenever  an  opportunity  is  afforded  ;  and  almost  any  kind  of  an  oppor- 
tunity, answers  their  purpose.  Like  those  in  the  Eastern  section,  they 
will  also  rob  you,  whenever  they  are  satisfijed,  that  they  have  the  prepon- 


60  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

derance  of  power,  and  that  there  is  no  probability  of  chastisement,  froHj 
any  other  source. 

The  most  numerous  and  important  tribes,  of  the  Western  section,  are  the 
Shatshct,  Squamish,  Toando,  Chahims,  Classet,  Chenook,  Chitsop,Klackr 
amus,  Klackatats,  Kallapuyas,  Umpquas,  Killamucks,  Rogues,  Klamets, 
Shasty  and  Celkilis  tribes,  which  like  all  other  tribes  of  the  country,  have, 
by  many,  been  thought  to  be  migratory,  and  wandering  tribes,  but  this  ap- 
pears not  to  be  the  case.  They  are  always  to  be  found  within  their  own 
proper  territories,  sometimes  passing  and  re-passing,  however,  from  fish- 
ing to  fishing,  or  from  hunting  ground  to  hunting  ground  ;  yet,  their  usu- 
al haunts  are  very  seldom,  if  ever,  entirely  abandoned.  They  all  subsist 
almost  entirely  upon  fish,  which  they  are  enabled  to  take  in  any  abun- 
dance, and  at  any,  and  every  season  of  the  year.  Some  of  them  also 
hunt,  but  hunting  appears  to  require  too  much  active  exertion,  to  comport 
with  their  inherent  and  hereditary  indolence,  therefore,  as  a  means  of 
livelihood,  it  is  not  very  generally  adopted.  They  generally  live  in  small 
huts,  constructed  in  the  most  simple,  and  artless  manner  imaginable. 
Uprights  of  about  eight  feet  iji  length  are  obtained,  which  are  inserted 
about  one  foot  into  the  greund,  side  by  side,  forn^.ing  either  a  square  or 
circular  inclosure,  of  about  ten  feet  in  diameter.  At  the  side  of  these  up- 
rights, about  two  feet  from  the  ground,  and  also  about  five  feet  from  the 
ground,  poles  are  placed  horizontally,  and  attached  by  means  of  barks  or 
withes  to  the  uprights,  when  the  v/alls  are  completed.  The  roof  or  cov- 
er, is  of  bark  or  branches  and  twigs  of  trees,  which,  thrown  on  in  the 
roughest  manner,  completes  these  primitive,  rude  dwellings,  of  the  Ore- 
gon aborigines.  These  Indians  are  of  nmch  service  to  tlie  settlers,  as 
they  can  be  employed  for  a  mere  nominal  compensation,  to  perform  vari- 
ous kinds  of  labor,  at  many  kinds  of  which,  they  are  very  expert,  espec- 
ially paddling  canoes,  rowing  boats,  hunting  and  driving  horses,  and  bear- 
ing dispatches.  With  the  exception  of  those  in  tlie  extreme  northern 
and  southern  portions  of  the  country,  they  are  entirely  Iriendly  and  in- 
offensive.  Such  is  the  character,  particularly  of  those,  in  the  immediate 
neighborhood  of  the  different  settlements,  yet,  it  is  true,  that  the  settlers 
here,  are  not  entirely  free  from  the  little  pilferings,  and  low  treachery,  to 
which  all  Indians  are,  more  or  less  addicted.  They  very  seldom  steal  any 
thing  but  food  and  clothing,  though  tliey  frequendy  drive  the  horses  of  the 
settlers  oft*,  in  order  that  they  may  be  employed  to  find  them,  and  this 
they  do,  in  order  to  obtain  food  and  clothing,  as  a  reward  for  their  servi- 
ces. The  word  friendly,  is  here  used,  in  tl\e  sense  in  which  it  is 
used  upon  a  former  page,  signifying  merely,  that  they  will  make  no  unpro- 
voked attack  upon  your  person,  o.r  tliat  they  will  not  kill  you  ;  but  not 
that  they  will  not  steal,  for  stealing  appears  to  be  an  inborn  vice,  to  which 
all  barbarous  Indians,  are  habitually  addicted.  The  statement,  which  I 
have  seen  in  several  of  our  western  papers,  in  reference  to  the  burning 
of  Dr.  Whitman's  mill,  by  the  Indians,  as  an  act  of  Avar  or  hostility,  is 
entirely  unfounded.  The  burning  of  this  mill,  occurred  while  I  was  in 
that  country,  and  it  was  wholly  nccidental ;  no  fiudt  or  design  whatever, 
was  attributed  to  the  Indians.  It  is  also  reported,  that  all  the  various 
tribes  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  settlements,  are  combining,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  making  a  simultaneous  attack,  upon  the  settlers.  This  report  ]fi 
also,  without  foundation,  for  that  unanimity  of  feeling  does  not  exist 
among  them,  which  would  be  indispensable  to  such  a  combination.     But 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  4i 

it  they  were  hostile,  and  should  combine,  for  warlike  purposes,  still,  no 
danger  whatever,  would  be  apprehendetl  from  them,  for  they  have  neither 
the  means,  nor  courage,  to  enable  them  to  prosecute  an  elBcient  warfare. 
A  civil  organization  has  recently  taken  place  in  Oregon,  and  an  infant 
republic  is  now,  in  full  operation.     Several  attempts  had  been  made  to 
effect  an  organization,  prior  to  the  spring  of  1843, but  they  had  all  proved 
ineffectual.     The  present  organization  took  place,  in  the  spring  of  1843, 
in  accordance  with  the  expressed  wishes,  of  a  great  majority  of  all  the 
settlers.     An  election  was  held,  during  the  same  spring,  when  the  various 
officers,  such  as  members  of  the  legislature,  a  supreme  judge,  justices  of 
the  peace,  sheriffs,  constables,  a  treasurer,  a  secretary,  and  the  different 
prothonotaries,  were   elected.     No  executive  was  elected,  consequently, 
the  government  must,  of  course,  prove  very  inefficacious ;  though  it  was 
designed  merely,  as  a  substitute  for  a  government,  until  the  United  States 
shall  afford  them  a   government,  more  enlarged,  and  more  effective ;  to 
which  event,  the  people  of  Oregon  look  forward,  with  a  deep,  and  abiding 
interest.     The  legislature  convened  in  the  month  of  May  1843,  at  which 
time,  it  adopted   the  statute  laws   of  Iowa,  with  such   alterations    and 
amendments,  as  local  circumstances,  seemed  to  require.     Neitlier  the  offi- 
cers of  the  Hudson'sBayCompany,  nor  any  persons  in  the  service  of  that 
company,  took  any  part  in  this  governmental  organization,  nor  did  many 
of  the  Canadians  or  half-breeds,  who  had  formerly  been  engaged  in  the 
service  of  that  company.     The  reason  assigned  by  the  gentlemen  of  that 
company,  for  the  neutral  course  which  they  pursued,  was  that  they  were 
British  subjects,  and    hence,  amenable  to   the   laws  of  that  government, 
which  were  already  extended  to  that  country,  and  in  full  force;  therefore, 
whatever  necessity  might  exist,  on  the  part  of  American  citizens,  to  en- 
act a  temporary  code  of  laws,  no  such  necessity  existed   on  the  part  of 
British  subjects.     Those  gentlemen,  no  doubt,  pursued  tlie  proper  course, 
in  reference  to  their  duty,  as  Hritish  subjects,  ibr  it  is  strictly  true,  that  by 
an  act  of  parliament,  the  jurisdiction  and  laws  of  Upper  Canada,  are  ex- 
tended over  all  that  country,  occupied  by  t])e  British  fur  traders,  whether 
such  country  is  owned,  or  claimed  by  the  Britisii  government.     In  accor- 
dance with   this  law,  several  gentlemen   of  the    Hudson's  BayCompany 
were   appointed,   and   now  officiate,  as  justices  of  peace;  having  juris- 
diction of  all  civil  matters  of  controversy^  where  the  amount  claimed,  does 
not  exceed  two  hundred  pounds  steriing.     The  jurisdiction  of  these  jus- 
tices, in    criminal   cases,  only  extend   to    the    examination  of  those  who 
stand  charged  with  the  commission  of  criminal  offences  ;  against  whom, 
if  sufficient  evidence  is  found,  they  are  sent  to  Upper  Canada,  for  final  trial. 
This  jurisdiction  docs  not  extend,  as  some  have  supposed,  to  the  citizens 
of  the  United  States  ;  but,  as  is  tims  seen,  there  are  two  distinct  forms 
of  government,  now  established  in  Oregon,  which  will  most  likely,  con- 
flict, and  thereby,  produce  serious  consequences,  if  they  are  long      con- 
tinued. 

Great  Britain,  then,  has  already  done,  by  actual  legislation,  what  our  gov- 
ernment seems  willing  to  concede,  that  we  have  no  right  to  do,  under'' the 
existing  circumstances.  Although  Great  Britain,  has  already  extended  the 
jurisdiction  and  laws  of  Canada,  over  that  country,  when  it  is  proposed 
to  extend  the  jurisdiction  and  laws  of  Iowa,  over  the  same  country  ;  or 
I  in  any  other  manner  to  establish  a  government  there  ;  it  is  insisted  that 
!  the  government  of  the  United  States,  has  not  the  right.     It  is  claimed  by 


«2  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

the  United  States  ;  that  Oregon  territory  belongs  to  her  alone,  and  that  / 
Great  Britain,  has  no  right  whatever,  to  any  part  of  it,  upon  any  recogniz- 
ed principle,  of  the  laws  of  nations.     Now  if  this  is  true,  may  not  our 
government,  extend  its  jurisdiction  over  that  country,  and   that  too,  in 
any  manner  which  she  may  deem  proper?     But,  it  is  remarked,  that  by 
the  treaty  of  London,  the  stipulations  of  the  treaty  of  Ghent,  are  indefi- 
nitely extended,  which  gives  British  subjects,  the  same  right  to  settle,  and 
trade  in  Oregon,  as  citizens  of  the  United  States  have  ;  that  is  true,  but 
how  does  this  permission,  destroy  the  right  of  this  government,  to  extend 
its  jurisdiction  and  laws  over  its  own   territory'^     Admitting  however, 
tliat  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  country,  in  fact,  all  belongs  to  the  United 
States,  as  the  question  of  title  is  yet  unsettled,  still,  have  not  the  United 
States,  the  same  authority,  the  same  right,  to  extend  their  jurisdiction  and 
laws  over  that  territory,  that  Great  Britain  has,  to  extend  her  jurisdiction 
and  laws  over  the  same  country  ?     In  any  view  of  this  subject,  it  is  not 
only  clear,  that  this  government  has  the  right  to  extend  its  jurisdiction 
over  that  country,  in  any  manner  that  it  may  think  expedient,  but  also, 
that  it  is  its  duty  to  do  so;  a  duty  which  it  owes  to  its  own  interests  ;  its 
own  security  ;  and  above  all,  to  its  own,  thus  far,  neglected  citizens,  in 
that  wild  and  perilous  land,  of  doubtful  and  heterogeneous  jurisdictions. 
The  market,  trade  and  commerce,  of  this  infant  country,  are  even  now, 
much  more  extensive  than  the  most  prophetic,  could  possibly  have  fore- 
seen.    An  ample  market  is  now  atlbrded,  in  the  country,  and  at  the  very 
doors  of  the  farmers,  for  all  their  surplus  produce.  The  Hudson's  Bay 
Company  has  certain  arrangements,  by  which,  it  is  enabled  to  take  the 
products  of  the  country,   at   the  highest  prices,  even  at  the  doors  of 
the   farmers,  which,    is    a  very  great   convenience   to    the   farmer,   as 
well  us  a  great  saving  of  time   and  expense.     The  American  merchants, 
also  afibrd  an  additional  market,  for  the  wheat  and  the  various  other  pro- 
ductions of  the  country  ;  all  of  which,  as  well  as  labor  of  all  kinds,  bear 
a  very  good    price.     Wheat  is  worth  from  sixty  cents  to  one  dollar  per 
bushel,  flour  from  four  to  five  dollars  per  barrel ;  potatoes    from    twenty 
five  to  fifty  cents  per  bushel;  beans  from  seventy -five  cents,  to  one  dollar  ; 
oats  from  twenty  five  to  fifty  cents ;  beef  from  four  to  eight  cents  per  pound ; 
pork  from  five  to  ten  cents  ;  fresh  salmon  from  one  to  four  cents  ;  salted 
salmon  from  four  to  six  cents,  or  from  eight  to  twelve  dollars  per  barrel ; 
butter  from  twenty  to  thirty  f-ents  per  pound ;  and   all  things  else,  in  the 
same   proportion.     Labor "  of  ordinary  hands  is  worth  from  one  to  two 
dollars  per  day  ;  that  of  mechanics,  from  two  to  four  dollars  ;  and  that  of 
Indians,  from  twenty  five,  to  fifty  cents  per  day.     All  kinds  of  dry  goods 
and  groceries,  are  generally,  alTorded  here,  as  cheap  as  they  are  in  any 
of  our  western   states;  especially,  by  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  the 
merchants  of  which,  very  much   undersell  those    of  the  United  States. 
This  may  be  attributed  to  the  fiict,  that  this  company,  ships  its  annual 
supplies  of  goods,  directly  from  England,  free  of  duty,  which  enables  it 
to  sell   at  prices  much  lower,  than  those  of  the  American  merchants ; 
hence  it  is,  that  almost  the  entire  trade  of  Oregon,  is  as  yet,  confined  to 
that  vastly  wealthy  company.     No  unfairness,  however,  can  be  attributed 
to  the  company  in  this  respect,  for  its  course  of  dealing  is  the  most  hon- 
orable and  commendable ;  but  this  result  is  the  natural  consequence,  of 
guch  an  unequal   competition.     We   see  that  English   merchants,  sus* 
tain  themselves,  with  much  success,  in  competition  with  our  merchants 


to  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  03 

in  the  States,  norwithstanding  the  high  duties  imposed  upon  many  of 
their  imports;  to  remove  these  duties  then,  as  in  Oregon,  must  necessa- 
rily, give  the  English  merchant,  for  many  years  to  come,  a  decided  pre- 
ponderance in  trade. 

The  chief  trade  of  Oregon,  as  yet,  is  the  fur  trade,  which  is  almost 
entirely,  monopolized  by  that  company.  This  trade,  however  profitable 
it  may  formerly  have  been,  and  although  it  is  still  very  lucrative,  yet,  it 
is  rapidly  decreasing,  owing  to  the  great  decrease  of  the  fur-bearing  ani- 
mals, which  was  alluded  to^upon  a  former  page.*  The  peltries  annually 
collected  in  Oregon,  by  this  company  are,  at  this  time,  estimated  at  about 
one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dollars,  which,  however,  is  far  less,  than 
the  returns  of  former  years.  The  trade  in  grain  and  lumber,  is  also, 
chiefly  confined  to  this  company,  which  ships  the  former,  in  large  quanti- 
ties to  Sitka  under  a  contract  with  the  Russians  ;  and  the  latter,  in  very 
great  quantities,  to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  where  it  is  sold  for  about  forty 
dollars  per  thousand.  The  staples  of  this  country,  will  eventually,  be 
grain,  pork,  beef,  hides,  tallow,  fish,  wool,  lumber  and  coal,  all  of  which, 
may  be  produced,  in  abundance,  for  exportation  ;  and  the  Russian  settle- 
ments, China  and  the  various  islands  of  the  Pacific,  will  undoubtedly, 
forever  afford,  an  ample  market,  for  all  its  surplus  productions.  For 
many  years  to  come,  however,  the  continued,  and  increasing  emigration 
will  afTord  a  hom.^  ir/arket,  at  least,  for  most  of  the  grain,  vegetables, 
pork,  beef  and  lumber,  which  the  country  will  produce.  Such  is  now, 
the  case  ;  the  emigrants  annually  purchase  most  of  the  provisions,  as  well 
as  cattle,  horses,  hogs,  sheep  and  lumber,  of  which  the  former  settlers 
wish  to  dispose.  This  country  possesses  a  very  decided  advantange,  over 
all  the  other  newly  settled  countries,  of  the  United  States,  from  its  prox- 
imity to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  which  afford  an  extensive  market,  at  which 
all  its  surplus  productions,  are  readily,  exchangad,  for  the  various  tropical 
productions.  This  country  also  possesses  many  commercial  advantages, 
much  superior,  to  those  possessed  generally,  by  other  newly  settled  coun- 
tries of  the  States.  Its  commercial  advantages,  as  before  remarked,  are 
tolerably  extensive  in  the  northern  part,  although  they  are  rather  incon- 
siderable, in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  settlements,  and  in  the  southern 
portion ;  yet  its  commerce  is,  at  this  time,  tolerably  extensive.  There 
are  frequent  annual  arrivals,  at  all  the  different  accessible  ports,  from 
the  Russian  settlements,  the  Sandwich  islands,  California,  the  United 
States  and  England.  In  all,  there  are  eight  or  ten  vessels,  engaged  in 
the  Oregon  trade,  of  which,  the  company  has  five,  measuring  from  two 
to  seven  hundred  tuns.  They  are  all  engaged,  the  greater  part  of  the 
year,  in  importing  goods  from  England,  and  exporting  wheat,  furs,  fish 
and  timber  in  return.  One  of  these  ships  arrives  every  spring,  with  a 
stock  of  goods,  designed  to  supply  the  different  trading  posts,  which  hav- 
ing been  disposed  of  in  that  manner,  a  cargo  of  lumber  is  taken  to  the 
Sandwich  Islands,  or  a  cargo  of  goods  and  flour  to  Sitka  or  Kam- 
schatka.  Having  disposed  of  their  freight,  at  the  places  last  mentioned, 
these  vessels  return  to  Vancouver,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  summer,  where 
tlie  furs,  collected  during  the  previous  year,  are  shipped  for  England. 
These  vessels,  although  designed  merely,  to  carry  on  trade  between  the 
places  above  mentioned,  are  all  well  armed  with  cutlasses,  muskets  and 
cannons.  Besides  these,  the  company  also,  has  a  steam-vessel,  which  is 
well  armed,  and  which  plies  along  the  coast,  and  in  the  inlets  and  bays, 


64  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

northward  from  the  Columbia.  There  are  also  four  or  five  American 
vessels,  which  touch  annually,  at  the  different  ports  of  Oregon,  by  the 
way  of  the  Sandwich  Islands.  They  usually,  arrive  in  the  spring  and 
autumn,  bringing  goods,  and  receiving  hides,  tallow,  furs,  wheat  and  fish 
in  return.  Besides  the  merchant  vessels,  which  trade  in  the  Pacific, 
there  are  numerous  whale-ships,  and  ships  of  war,  which  cruise  in  the 
north  Pacific,  but  which,  however,  very  seldom  touch  at  any  of  the  ports 
in  this  country.  It  is  believed,  that  the  foregoing  will  give  a  view  suffi- 
ciently enlarged,  for  the*purposes,  for  which  =this  little  work  was  designed, 
cf  the  present,  and  at  least,  a  faint  prelude,  of  the  future,  agricultural  and 
commercial  advantages  of  Oregon. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

SCENES  AND  INCIDENTS  OF  A  PARTY  OF  CALIFOR- 
NIA EMIGRANTS. 

Preparations  to  visit  California;  party  organized,  with  that  view.  Places  of 
rendezvous;  emigrants  convened  at;  number  of  Number  of  armed  men. 
Departure  from  rendezvous.  Arrival  a,t  Rogue^s  river  ;  crossing  of  Has- 
tile  movements  of  Indians.  Leaving  Rogue  s  river.  Meeting  of  a.  Cali- 
fornia party ;  encamped,  with.  A  discussio7i  ;  serious  consequences  of 
Left  without  a  guide.  A  separation;  serious  effects  of.  Meditations  in- 
terrupted. A  chase.  A  defeat.  Arrival  at  iliasiy  river.  An  attack.  A 
man  wounded.  Leaving  the  Chasly.  Ariival  at  the  Sacramento.  A  hat- 
tie.  Twenty  Indians  killed..  Lamentation,  and  howling  over  the  dead. 
Contemplated  reneical  of  attack ;  abandonment  of  Leaving  the  *'  scene  of 
blood.'"  Loss  of  two  men;  their  arrival  in  the  settlements.  Arrival  at 
Neic  IMvelia.  Hospitality  of  Capt.  Sutter.  Kindness  of  all  the  foreign- 
ers. Party  much  delighled  with  the  country.  Determination  to  make 
California^  a  future  hom.e. 

Having  remained  in  Oregon,  as  long  as  I  had  originally  designed,  I 
now,  proceeded  to  make  preliminary  arrangements,  for  an  over  land  tour 
to  California,  to  visit  which  country,  was  also  among  my  original  pur- 
poses. But  traveling  from  Or(^gon  to  California,  like  traveling  from  the 
States  to  Oregon,  is  attended  with  imminent  danger,  from  innumerable 
hostile  Indians ;  hrnce  it  became  necessary  to  obtain  a  party' of  armed 
men,  sufficient  in  numbers,  to  secure  our  protection.  I,  therefore,  visited 
the  different  neighborhoods,  with  that  view,  when  I  soon  found,  that  there 
would  be  no  difficulty  in  obtaining  a  party,  ample  in  numbers,  to  insure 
our  entire  safety.  Upon  designating  a  place  of  rendezvous,  on  the  Wal-. 
lammette  river,  about  twenty  miles  above  the  falls,  we  soon  had  fifty-three 
emigrants,  of  whom,  twenty-five  were  armed  men,  when  myself  having 
been  again  honored  with  command,  on  the  30th  day  of  May,  1843,  we 
were  outward-bound  for  the  second  and  last  paradise  of  the  west,  California. 
As  the  presumption  is,  that  many  of  the  Oregon  emigrants  will,  eventually, 
emigrate  to  California,  and  that  too,  by  the  same  route  which  I  traveled; 

I  have  deemed  it  proper,  to  give  some  of  the  principal  scenes  and  incidents, 
of  this  party  of  California  emigrants.     This  I  do,  in  order  to  put  the  fu 

ure  emigrants  upon  their  guard,  and  thereby,  to  enable  them,  to  avoid  the 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  65 

inntimerable  dangers  and  difficulties,  which  we  encountered,  and  of  whicfi, 
we  were  wholly  unadvised. 

Leaving  our  place  of  rendezvous,  as  above  stated,  nothing  of  importance 
occurred,  until  we  arrived  at  Rogue's  river,  which  we  were  under  the 
necessity  of  crossing,  by  the  aid  of  the  Indians,  who  soon  appeared  with 
their  canoes,  and  proffered  their  aid,  which  we  were  under  the  necessity 
of  accepting ;  but  we  proceeded  with  the  utmost  caution,  for  as  we  were 
well  advised,  several  parties  had  been  robbed  at  this  place,  under  quite 
similar  circumstances.  In  view  of  the  peculiarity  of  our  perilous  situa- 
tion, I  directed  twelve  men  to  cross  the  river,  in  advance,  in  order  to  re- 
ceive and  guard  the  baggage,  as  it  should  be  sent  across.  The  residue 
of  the  men,  remained,  in  order  to  protect  the  women  and  children,  and  to 
guard  the  horses  and  baggage,  previous  to  their  being  sent  across.  Dur- 
ing all  the  time,  which  was  occupied  in  crossing  the  river,  great  numbers 
of  Indians  thronged  around  us,  on  each  side  of  the  river,  frequently  rush- 
ing upon  us,  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  became  necessary  for  us  to  draw 
our  forces  out,  in  battle  array,  against  them,  when  we  were  under  the 
necessity,  of  discharging  a  gun  or  two  occasionally,  in  the  open  air,  in 
order  to  deter  them  from  any  further  hostile  movements.  Upon  dis- 
charging a  gun,  they  would,  invariably,  fall  back,  and  flee  in  every  di- 
rection-, with  the  greatest  confusion  ;  but  after  the  lapse  of  a  very  few  min- 
utes, they  would  again,  crowd  and  huddle  around  us,  in  increased  numbers, 
when  we  would  again  dispel  them  as  before.  Their  object  m  crowding 
upon  us,  in  this  manner,  was  to  intermingle  Vv^ith  our  people,  to  such  an  ex- 
tent, as  to  produce  general  confusion  and  disorder,  when  they  designed  to  steal 
and  plunder;  and  if  they  could  produce  disorder  and  tumult,  to  the  extent 
that  they  desired,  they,  no  doubt,  intended  to  make  a  direct  attack  upon 
us,  not  only  with  the  view  of  stealing  and  robbing,  but  also,  with  a  deter- 
mination to  effect  our  indiscriminate  extermination.  By  the  above  system 
of  caution,  however,  we  finally,  succeeded  in  crossing  the  river,  in  perfect 
safety,  and  were  enabled  to  leave  them,  to  enjoy  the  wild  bowlings  of 
their  timid  confusion,  without  the  loss  to  ourselves,  of  either  life  or 
property.  Upon  emerging  from  the  boisterous  confusion,  of  these  more 
than  barbarous  beings,  we  continued  our  journey,  for  several  days,  with- 
out any  thing  worthy  of  remark,  until  we  met  a  company  of  cattle  drovers 
and  emigrants,  who  were  on  their  way  from  California  to  Oregon,  the 
former,  with  cattle  for  the  Oregon  market,  and  the  latter,  designing  to 
locate  in  Oregon,  where  they  hoped  to  find  refuge,  from  the  oppression, 
which  they  had  suffered,  in  California,  of  which  I  shall  speak  more  fully 
hereafter. 

Upon  meeting  this  party,  both  parties  immediately  encamped,  where 
we  remained  together,  all  that  day  and  night,  as  well  as  a  part  of  the  en- 
suing day,  which  time  was  spent,  in  discussing  the  comparative  advan- 
tages, and  disadvantages,  of  our  respective  places  of  destination.  We,  of 
course,  had  nothing  very  favorable  to  say  of  Oregon,  for  we  were  then  in 
search  of  a  desirable  place  of  abode,  which  in  our  view,  could  not  be 
found  in  Oregon ;  nor  had  they  much  to  say  in  favor  of  California. 
They  ail  concurred  in  the  opinion,  that  California  was,  beyond  any  doubt, 
one  of  the  most  delightful  countries  in  the  known  world,  both  in  point  of 
mildness  of  climate,  and  fertility  of  soil ;  but  they  remarked,  that  they  had 
been  seriously  oppressed  there,  and  that  they  would  seek  refuge,  for  the 
8 


66  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

time  beings  in  Oregon.  This  discussion  terminated  in  very  disastrous 
consequences  to  us ;  for  about  one  third  of  our  party,  was  prevailed  upon 
to  return  to  Oregon.  This  reduced  our  number,  of  aimed  men  to  six* 
teen,  and  that  too,  in  a  region  where  our  full  forces,  were  more  than  any 
where  else  required  ;  in  a  country  where  we  were  everywhere  surrounded 
by  a  numerous  and  hostile  foe;  where  our  "sixteen"  were,  at  anytime^ 
liable  to  be  attacked  by  thousands  of  unrestrained,  and  barbarous  Indians. 
But  the  most  distressing  circumstance,  at  this  particular  juncture,  was,  that 
our  guide  also  left  us,  with  a  view  of  reluming  to  Oregon,  contrary  to 
our  wishes,  and  repeated  solicitations  to  remain.  This  left  us,  not  only 
without  a  force  sufficient  for  our  future  protection,  but  also,  without  any 
knowledge  of  the  route,  or  any  means  of  obtaining  that  knowledge;  and 
also,  without  any  knowledge  of  the  haunts  and  prowess  of  the  counties^ 
savages,  with  whom  we  were  now  everywhere  surrounded.  The  time 
of  our  separation  had  now  arrived,  when  we  proceeded  to  take  our  leave, 
of  these  our  friends  of  long  standing,  with  whom  we  had  traversed  the 
great  western  prairies,  immersed  in  doubt,  and  surrounded  with  fearful 
dangers  innumerable ;  and  with  whom,  we  had  penetrated  the  deep,  wild 
recesses  of  Oregon,  amid  the  howls  of  beasts  of  prey,  the  yells  of  frantic 
savages,  and  desolation  and  death,  in  all  their  various  and  varied  forms. 
We  were  sad,  sad  indeed,  and  gricA'ed  too,  even  to  the  shedding  of  tears. 
Much  did  we  regret  the  necessity,  which  impelled  our  separation,  and  as 
much,  did  ^ve  dread  the  danger,  attendant  upon  that  separation ;  but  to  ac- 
complish our  purpose,  we  were  determined,  regardless  of  all  consequences. 
So  leaving  our  friends,  we  traveled  on,  silently  and  solemnly,  contem- 
plating the  cheerless  past  and  the  fearful  future. 

As  I  moved  on,  in  this  mood  of  mind,  a  half  or  three  quarters  of  a 
mile,  in  advance  of  the  party,  my  meditations  were  interrupted  by  the 
sudden  appearance  of  two  Indians,  who  were  in  close  pursuit  of  a  fine 
fat  cow,  which  had  strayed  from  the  party  to  which  1  have  just  alluded, 
I  immediately  gave  chase  to  these  intruders  upon  my  solitude,  without 
being  observed  by  them,  until  I  had  approached  within  about  thirty  yards 
of  them,  when  I  fired  upon  them,  but  whether  I  wounded  either  of  them, 
I  could  not  ascertain  ;  but  at  all  events,  I  so  alarmed  one  of  them,  that  he 
yelled  most  furiously,  and  with  tremendous  leaps,  soon  reached  a  deep 
ravine,  which  afforded  him  a  secure  retreat,  as  its  banks  were  thickly 
studded,  with  willows.  Turning  to  the  other,  I  found  him  still  in  hot 
pursuit  of  his  intended  prey ;  but  as  he  saw  that  I  had  turned  my  atten- 
tion to  him,  he  also  fled  with  unusual  rapidity,  and  took  refuge  with  his 
comrade,  among  the  same  willows,  near  to  which,  I  had  no  inclination 
to  approach,  as  willows  are  thought  by  mountaineers  to  be  "dangerous 
things."  The  party  soon  came  up,  and  the  cow  very  soon  fell  a  victim 
to  our  returning  appetites  ;  but  we  saw  no  more  of  our  noble  competitors. 
Perhaps  the  one  was  engaged,  in  some  secluded  place,  extracting  buck- 
shot, from  the  lower  limbs  of  his  fellow.  As  we  continued  our  journey, 
we  frequently  saw  the  Indians,  far  upon  the  mountain's  height,  viewing 
us  as  we  wound  our  serpentine  way,  through  low,  deep  valleys,  up  high, 
towering  hills,  or  over  beautiful,expansive  plains.  Thus,  remaining  upon 
the  extreme  height  of  the  surrounding  mountains,  they  always  kept  their 
eyes  fixed  upon  us,  until  we  had  encamped  at  night,  when  they  would 
approach  us,  with  a  view  of  stealing  or  killing  our  horses.  We,  how- 
eveij  met  with  no  serious  difliculty  with  the  Indians,  until  we  arrived  at 


TO    OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  67 

a  small  tributary  of  Rogue's  river,  called  the  Chasty  river,  where  we  en- 
camped, for  the  night.  About  midnight,  we  were  attacked  by  them,  the 
first  indication  that  we  had  of  which,  was  the  cry,  by  one  of  the  guards, 
of  "Indians,"  "Indians,"  which  soon  brought  the  men  "to  arms,"  when  a 
brisk,  random  fire  commenced,  in  all  directions  from  the  camp,  which 
soon  dispelled  our  midnight  assailants,  not,  however,  until  they  had  se- 
verely wounded  one  man  and  two  horses.  The  man  who  was  wounded, 
was  a  Mr.  Bellamy,  who  happened  to  be  posted  as  guard,  at  the  most 
vulnerable  part  of  the  camp,  and  near  the  river.  He  was  the  guard  who 
gave  notice  of  the  attack,  which  however,  he  did  not  do,  until  several 
arrows  had  been  thrown.  The  first  knowledge  which  he  had,  of  the 
presence  of  the  Indians,  was  the  reception  of  an  arrow  in  his  back,  which, 
I  suppose,  he  thought  to  be  "striking  proof,"  "pointed  evidence,"  of  their 
presence,  if  not  of  their  omnipresence.  The  arrow  was  immediately  ex- 
tracted, but  from  the  intensity  of  the  pain,  which  it  appeared  to  produce, 
it  was  feared,  by  some,  that  it  would  be  attended  with  fatal  consequences. 
In  the  morning,  it  was  thought,  from  the  increased  pain,  that  in  all  proba- 
bility, the  spinal  marrow  was  affected,  and  hence,  that.it  would  be  unsafe 
to  move  that  day;  but  we  determined  to  make  the  attempt,  which  we  ac- 
cordingly did,  and  were  happy  to  find,  that  it  was  not  attended  with  seri- 
rious  consequences. 

From  this  encampment,  we  now  moved  on,  without  any  thing  worthy 
of  remark,  until  we  arrived  at  the  Sacramento  river,  in  California,  about 
one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  above  the  bay  of  St.  Francisco.  Here,  we 
were  just  on  the  point  of  encamping,  when  we  were  surprised  by  the 
sudden  appearance,  of  several  hundred  Indians,  who  appeared  to  have 
been  advised  of  our  approach,  and  to  have  remained  there,  in  ambush, 
with  a  view  of  attacking  us,  upon  our  arrival.  Upon  observing  our  pe- 
culiarly unfavorable  position,  I  immediately  altered  my  purpose,  and  di- 
rected four  of  the  men,  to  take  the  women  and  children,  as  well  as  the 
horses,  into  the  plains,  and  there  remain.  Myself,  and  the  residue  of  the 
party,  dismounted,  and  at  the  same  time,  turned  our  horses  loose,  which 
were  also  driven  into  the  plains,  while  we  held  our  position,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  receiving  the  enemy,  whose  numbers,  during  this  time,  had  in- 
creased to  about  four  hundred.  They  continued  to  advance,  with  most  ter- 
rific and  frantic  yells,  which  together  with  their  fiendish  gestures,  and  de- 
moniac grins,  too  clearly  indicated  their  hostile  designs.  They  now,  ra- 
pidly advanced,  with  increased  yelling,  gesticulating,  and  grinning,  as 
though  mere  frantic  gesticulations,  wild  noises,  and  demoniac  grins,  con- 
stituted irresistible  weapons  of  warfare.  They  were  now,  within  about 
thirty  yards  of  us,  and  every  moment  seemed  to  indicate,  nothing  but  an 
immediate  attack,  yet,  as  it  was  possible,  that  I  might  mistake  their  design, 
I  paused  for  a  few  moments ;  but  every  moment  only  confirmed  our  sus- 
picions ;  every  moment  showed  most  conclusively,  that  they  were  prepa- 
ring for  a  desperate  and  death-like  attack.  Still,  hoping  to  deter  them, 
from  their  hostile  purpose,  I  discharged  a  gun,  in  the  open  air,  upon 
which,  they  all  fell  to  the  ground,  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  chief  was 
heard,  haranguing  them,  at  the  top  of  his  voice,  while  the  men  were 
everywhere  seen,  stringing  their  bows,  and  preparing  for  the  charge. 
They  were  now  rising,  to  make  their  deadly  onset ;  the  arrows  from  their 
rear,  were  already  falling  thickly  among,  and  around  us ;  there  could  be  no 
further  doubt,  as  to  their  designs,  nor  could  there  be  any  further  delay ; 


68  THE    EMIGRANTS'    GUIDE 

we  fired,  and  fourteen  of  them  fell,  victims  to  their  own  ignorance  and 
insolence.  The  residue,  now  fled,  in  every  direction,  taking  refuge  behind 
trees,  shrubs,  and  in  ravines  ;  but  they  continued  to  throw  their  arrows, 
in  increased  numbers,  and  with  increased  violence,  for  about  two  hours, 
when  finally,  from  some  cause,  their  fury  and  violence  were  abated.  Our 
men  had,  in  the  mean  time,  cut  them  off  occasionally,  as  they  would  ven- 
ture to  emerge,  from  their  temporary  hiding  places.  Their  loss  was  about 
twenty  killed,  besides  many,  who  were  mortally  wounded,  and  whom  we 
saw,  either  crawling  away,  upon  the  ground,  or  being  dragged  away  by 
their  friends. 

Now  finding,  that  they  were  inclined  to  abandon  the  contest,  we  pro- 
ceeded to  make  our  arrangements,  to  join  that  portion  of  our  party, 
which  remained  in  the  plains;  but,  as  we  commenced  our  march,  they  re- 
newed their  charge,  which  they  continued,  until  they  arrived  at  the  point, 
where  the  attack  was  made,  and  where  the  ground  was  still,  strewed  with 
the  dead.  Upon  arriving  at  this  place,  and  perceiving  for  the  first  time, 
that  their  companions  in  arms,  were  actually  dead  ;  they  commenced  a 
most  tremendous  howling  and  yelling,  which  plainly  indicated  that  this 
was  the  first  knowledge,  which  they  had,  of  the  desolating  ravages,  that 
death  had  made  in  their  ranks.  This  wf.s  further  evinced,  from  their 
throwing  down  their  bows  and  arrows,  and  falling  upon  the  dead  bodies, 
of  their  companions,  and  their  most  piteous  howling  and  lamentation, 
with  which  they  now  rent  the  air.  They  paid  no  further  attention  to  us, 
but  continued  to  howl  and  yell  most  furiously,  falling  upon  their  dead, 
and  pulling  and  hauling  them  about,  in  every  direction,  evidently,  so  ut- 
terly confused,  that  they  knew  not  what  they  did  ;  entirely  insensible,  of 
all  surrounding  circumstances.  Perceiving  their  indisposition  to  molest 
us  further,  we  now  left  them,  when  their  bowlings  and  lamentations  in- 
creased, to  such  an  extent,  that  they  were  distinctly  heard,  at  the  distance 
of  three  miles.  We  traveled  that  evening,  but  about  five  or  six  miles,  from 
the  "  field  of  battle,"  where  we  encamped  with  the  strictest  regard,  to  our 
successful  defence,  in  case  of  an  attack,  which  we  had  some  grounds  to 
anticipate.  As  fortune  would  have  it,  however,  we  were  not  attacked  ; 
but  upon  examining  the  country,  in  the  vicinity  of  our  camp,  we  found 
that  they  had,  during  the  night,  approached  within  a  few  hundred  rods  of 
us,  in  increased  numbers,  and  clearly,  with  the  view  of  attacking  us  ;  but 
upon  perceiving  our  peculiarly  favorable  position,  and  profiting  by  the 
sore  and  deadly  chastening,  which  they  had,  so  recently  received,  they 
no  doubt,  thought  it  the  part  of  prudence,  if  not  of  bravery,  to  abandon 
their  dangerous  enterprise.  So  concluding,  they  left  us,  and  in  the  morn- 
ing, we  left  them,  to  enjoy  their  degraded  solitude,  sincerely  hoping, 
never  to  be  so  unfortunate,  as  to  meet  again,  any  where  this  side  of  eter- 
nity;  and  no  doubt,  they  had  as  little  anxiety,  to  renew  our  acquaintance. 

We,  afterwards,  neither  met  with  them,  nor  any  other  hostile  Indians, 
but  continued  our  journey,  without  any  serious  difficulty  or  interruption, 
other  than  the  loss,  for  the  time  being,  of  two  of  our  men,  who  were  lost, 
and  absent  from  the  party,  for  several  days,  without  ammuniUon,  and 
hence,  without  food  ;  but  after  having  suffered  extremely,  both  from  hun- 
ger and  thirst,  they  both  arrived,  on  the  fourth  or  fifth  day,  in  the  settle- 
ments of  California.  One  of  them  arrived  at  Capt.  Sutter's  fort,  on  the 
Sacramento,  and  the  other,  at  a  farm  about  forty  miles  above  that  place, 
about  the  same  time,  that  the  main  body  of  the  party,  arrived  at  the  Sac- 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA  69 

ramento,  opposite  New  Helvetia.  The  whole  company,  received  every 
possible  attention,  from  all  the  foreigners  in  California,  and  especially, 
from  Capt.  Sutter,  who  rendered  every  one  of  the  party,  every  assistance 
in  his  power  ;  and  it  really  appeared,  to  afford  him  the  greatest  delight, 
to  be  thus  enabled,  to  render  important  aid,  to  citizens  of  his  former, 
adopted  country.  All  those  who  went  with  me  to  California,  as  well  as 
all  other  foreigners,  who  are  residing  there,  are  extremely  delighted  with 
the  country;  and  determined  to  remain  there,  and  make  California  the 
future  home,  not  only  of  themselves,  but  also,  of  all  their  friends,  and  rel- 
atives, upon  whom,  they  can  possibly  prevail,  to  exchange  the  sterile  hills, 
bleak  mountains,  chilling  winds,  and  piercing  cold,  of  their  native  lands, 
for  the  deep,  rich  and  productive  soil,  and  uniform,  mild  and  delightful 
climate,  of  this  unparalleled  region.  This  delightful  country,  will  form 
the  subject  of  several  successive  chapters,  which  it  is  believed,  will  fully 
show,  that  the  casual  allusions,  heretofore  made  to  this  country,  are,  by 
no  means,  mere,  gratuitous  exaggerations. 


CHAPTER  Tin. 

A  DESCRIPTION  OF  CALIFORNIA. 

Upper  California,  alone  treated  of;  its  situation  ;  its  boundaries  ;  its  super- 
ficies; itsnatural  divisions  .  Mountains  ;  description  of.  Cordilleras  moun- 
tains; their  course;  their  distance  from  the  sea;  their  altitude;  their passcf>; 
their  spurs.  California  mmmtains;  course  of ;  distance  from  the  sea;  eleva- 
tion of ;  their  parses.  Klamet  mountains  ;  their  course;  their  elevation  ; 
their  spurs  ;  their  pass.  Mountain  spurs  ;  description  of.  Three  hides  ; 
conic  formation  of.  Percullar  position  of  California.  Rivers  ;  descrip- 
tion of  Colorado;  its  source  ;  its  course;  length  of ;  navigableness  of ; 
tributaries  of  Sacramento  ;  importance  of;  its  source  ;  its  course  ;  its 
navigableness.  Dry  river;  its  peculiarities.  Subterfuent  streams.  Feather 
river ;  its  7iame,  from  what  derived.  The  American  fork.  Tulare  riv- 
er ;  third  in  importance.  Russian  river.  Klamet  river.  Bear  river. 
The  Salt  lake.  Rise  of  rivers.  Islands ;  deso^ipiion  of  St.  Catalina. 
Santa  Cruz.  St.  Clement.  Face  of  the  country  ;  of  thp  Western  sec- 
tion;  the  East eim  section.  Bays  and  harbors.  Bay  of  St.  Francisco. 
Bay  of  St.  JJeigo.  Bay  of  Monterey.  Bay  of  Bodaga.  Ba.y  of  Colora- 
do.    Commercial  advantage  of  California. 

Having  conducted  the  reader  to  California,  I  will  now  proceed  to  give 
a  brief  description,  of  tliat  highly  important  country,  which  is  latterly,  so 
justly  attracting  the  attention,  of  the  various  civilized  powers  of  the 
world.  From  the  extremely  narrow  limits  of  this  small  work,  I  am 
compelled,  to  confine  my  remarks,  entirely  to  Upper  California,  notwith- 
standing, both  Upper,  and  Lower  California,  are  properly,  and  naturally 
united,  and  have  always  been,  so  considered,  for  governmental,  and  other 
purposes  ;  but  to  treat  of  both  those  countries,  would  extend  this  des- 
cription, far  beyond,  either  of  my  original  or  present  purpose  ;  I  shall, 
therefore,  content  myself,  with  giving  a  description  of  the  former  alone. 
The  former,  is  selected  in  preference  to  the  latter,  because  of  its  greater 


70  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

extent,  both  of  territory  and  of  population  ;  and  because  of  its  being  that 
portion  of  the  Californias,  to  which,  the  attention,  not  only  of  the  enter- 
prising emigrants,  but  also,  that  of  the  avaricious  and  jealous  powers, 
of  the  civilized  world,  are  now  being  turned,  with  high  liopes,  either  of 
its  present,  or  ultimate  acquisition. 

Upper  California  is  a  Mexican  province  or  state,  situated  on  the  Pa- 
cific oVean,  between  the  forty-second,  and  thirty-second  parallels  of  north 
latitude.  It  is  bounded  on  the  east,  by  the  Cordilleras  mountains,  which 
are  a  continuation,  of  the  Rocky  mountain  range  ;  on  the  south,  by  So- 
nora,  the  gulf  of  California,  and  Lower  California  ;  on  the  west,  by  the 
Pacific  ocean ;  and  on  the  narth,  by  Oregon,  or  the  forty-second  parallel, 
of  north  latitude.  It  is  six  hundred  miles  in  extent,  from  north  to  south, 
and  about  eight  hundred  miles,  from  east  to  west ;  having  a  superficies  of 
about  480,000  square  miles  ;  more  than  four  times  as  large  as  Great 
Britain  ;  twice  as  large  as  France  ;  and  equal  to  twelve  states,  as  large  as 
that  of  Ohio.  It  is  naturally  divided,  into  two  great  sections  or  divisions, 
by  the  California  mountains,  which  together  with  the  Cordilleras,  and 
the  Klamet  mountains,  constitute  the  only  mountain  ranges,  of  tliis  coun- 
try. The  Cordilleras  mountains  run  very  nearly  north  and  south,  the 
whole  extent  of  the  country,  ranging  generally,  from  six  hundred,  to  a 
thousand  miles  from  the  coast.  Like  the  Rocky  mountains,  in  Oregon, 
they  are  generally  covered  perpetually  with  snow.  This  range  is,  also, 
of  extraordinary  altitude,  and  has  many,  very  elevated  peaks,  which  are 
from  ten  to  twenty  thousand  feet,  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  Several 
eligible  passes,  or  gaps,  are  also  found,  in  this  range,  the  most  important 
of  which,  is  that  in  the  vicinity  of  Santa  Fe,  near  the  latitude  34°  north. 
There  is  already  very  considerable  passing  and  re-passing  through  this 
gap,  which  is  no  doubt,  destined  to  increase,  very  much  as  the  emigration 
increases  to  that  country.  The  chief  emigration  will,  however,  undoubt- 
edly, always  be  through  the  great  soutiiehi  pass,  near  latitude  42°  north, 
which  was  alluded  to,  in  the  descriplicn  of  Oregon.  All  this  range  is,  for 
the  most  part,  entirely  sterile  and  unproductive,  producing  nothing  but 
low  shrubs  of  pine  and  cedar,  the  prickly-pear  and  wormwood  ;  amidst, 
and  in  the  immediate  vicinity,  of  the  mountains,  however,  there  are  nu- 
merous small,  but  extremely,  fertile  valleys,  as  well  as  many  elevated 
plains  and  prairies,  which  abound  with  vegetation.  Upon,  and  in  the  vi- 
cinity, of  the  various  streams,  heading  in  this  range,  very  good  timber  is 
also  found,  in  sulficient  quantities,  for  all  ordinary  purposes. 

The  California  mountains  are  a  continuation  of  the  Cascade,  or  Presi- 
dents' range,  of  Oregon  ;  their  general  course  is  also  nearly  north  and 
south,  ranging,  usually,  from  two,  to  four  hundred  miles  from  the 
coast,  and  terminating  near  the  head  of  the  gulf  of  California,  at  latitude  32 
deg.  north.  This  range  is  much  less  elevated,  than  the  Cordilleras  or 
Rocky  mountains,  yet,  it  has  several  very  elevated  po\iks,  marry  of  which, 
are  from  ten  to  fourteen  thousand  feet,  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  There 
are  several  very  easy,  natural  passes,  through  this  range  also,  the  princi- 
pal of  which,  and  that  through  which  the  chief  emigration  will  eventual- 
ly pass,  is  near  latitude  40  deg.  north,  through  which,  it  is  said,  load- 
ed wagons  may  now,  be  driven,  without  serious  interruption.  There  is 
also  another,  near  latitude  38  deg.  north,  through  which,  the  chief  trade 
in  the  northern  part  of  the  country,  has  been  carried  on,  as  the  more 


TO    OREGON   AND    C^M>IFORNIA.  71 

northern  pass  has  not,  until  quite  recently,  been  known.  This  pass  at 
latitude  38  deg.  north,  affords  a  very  elig-iblc  route  for  wagons,  but  it  will 
never  become,  as  extensive  a  thoroughfare,  as  that  at  latitude  40  deg.  north, 
•s  that  is  in  a  direct  route,  fcom  the  great  southern  pass,  in  the  Rocky 
mountains.  But  the  pass  near  latitude  38  deg.  north,  is  of  the  utmost 
importance,  as  it  affords  the  means  of  intercommunication,  between  the 
two  great  sections,  lying  east  and  west  of  the  California  moimtains.  Be- 
sides these  two  passes,  this  range  has  another  also,  near  latitude  34  deo-. 
north,  through  which,  the  Santa  Fe  traders  and  others,  annually  pass, 
and  which,  not  only  connects  the  two  great  valleys,  which  lie  on  the  easi 
and  west  sides  of  the  California  mountains,  but  it  also  affords  a  great 
thoroughfore,  by  which  the  southern  emigrants,  will  eventually,  travel 
by  hundreds  and  thousands.  The  California  mountains  are  much  more 
fertile,  than  the  Cordilleras  or  Rocky  mountains,  which  is  evidenced,  by 
their  being  generally,  covered  with  a  great  variety  of  vegetation,  as  Avell 
as  by  their  affording,  in  many  places,  a  great  abundance  of  good  timber. 
This  range  is  also  interspersed,  with  innumerable  limited  valleys,  elevated 
plains  and  prairies,  which  abound  with  both  vegetation  and  timber,  of 
most  luxuriant  growth.  The  Klaniet  range  was  described,  in  a  former 
page,  in  the  description  of  Oregon,  as  com.uiencing  at  the  Rocky  moun- 
tains, at  latitude  42  deg.  north,  and  running  in  a  direction,  west  southwest 
to  the  coast,  at  latitude  4!  deg.  north.  This  range  has  numerous  spurs, 
of  small  extent,  which  are  usually  covered  with  the  grasses,  and  various 
other  kinds  of  vegetation,  as  well  as  a  growth  of  small  timber,  while  the 
principal  range  is,  generally,  entirely  sterile.  It  is  also,  thickly  interspers- 
ed, with  small,  though  extremely  productive  valh^ys,  all  of  which,  are 
well  timbered,  and  well  watered  ;  and  like  the  Cascade  range,  it  also  has, 
several  very  high  peaks,  some  of  which  are  covered  with  perpetual  snow. 
There  is  but  one  eligible  pass  in  this  range,  which  is  found  near  latitude 
41  deg.  30  m.in.  ooith,  and  longitude  117  deg.  west  from  Greenwich, 
through  which,  wagons  can  be  driven,  with  very  little  inconvenience. 
This  pass  is  destined  to  become,  of  great  importance,  both  to  Oregon  and 
California,  in  facilitating  intercommunication  and  commerce,  between  the 
two  countries. 

Besides  these  distinct  ranges  of  mountains,  there  are  several  others, 
which,  in  many  places,  intersect  the  country  in  various  directions,  all  of 
which,  however,  may  be  traced  as  spurs  of  the  ranges  before  described. 
Some  of  them,  and  especially,  those  found  between  the  California,  and  the 
Cordilleras  or  Rocky  mountains,  have  been  thought,  by  some,  to  consti- 
tute a  distinct  range;  but,  upon  a  more  particular  examination,  they  will 
be  found  to  be  mere  spurs,  of  the  ranges  last  mentioned.  These,  like  the 
main  ranges,  to  which  they  belong,  also  have  high  peaks,  or  elevations, 
many  of  which,  rise  considerable  above  the  snow  lin*^,  which  is  here 
found  to  be,  about  seven  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  Here, 
as  in  Oregon,  wherever  you  are,  you  are  always  in  view  of  some  of  those 
extraordinary  conical  elevations,  which  are  always  covered  w^ith  snow, 
several  thousand  feet  deep;  but  there  are  much  fewer  of  them  here,  than 
in  Oregon.  Besides  these  snow-capped,  conical  elevations,  there  are  sev- 
eral others,  which  are  alike  conical  in  form,  but  which,  do  not  rise  above 
the  snow  line.  '  The  highest  and  principal  of  these,  are  the  three  butes, 
as  they  are  called,  which  are  situated  near  latitude  39  deg.  north,  and 
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  east,  from  the  coasL     They  are  conic 


7a  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

in  form,  rising  about  five  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea ;  and  be- 
ing entirely  isolated,  they  serve  as  great  land  marks  for  the  mountaineer, 
and  emigrant.  In  a  clear  day,  they  are,  frequently  seen,  at  a  distance  of 
fifty  or  sixty  miles^  by  persons  in  the  valley  ;  but  by  persons,  upon  the 
adjacent  mountains,  they  are,  not  unfrequently  seen,  even  eighty  or  nine^ 
ty  miles. 

Here  we  cannot  avoid  observing  some  of  the  peculiarities,  of  this  very 
extraordinary  country.  We  find  it  almost  enlirely  walled  in,  by  stupendous 
natural  walls,  which  are  perfectly  impregnable  and  impassable,  every- 
where, except  at  those  natural  gateways  or  gaps.  These  gaps  appear  to 
have  been  designed,  by  nature,  to  enhance  the  importance  of  this,  other- 
wise  important  and  valuable  country,  by  affording  easy  intercommunicar 
tion,  and  facilitating  trade  and  commerce,  with  all  the  surrounding  coun- 
try. The  great  southern  pass,  in  the  Rocky  mountains,  near  latitude  42 
deg.  north,  connects  this  country  with  the  United  States;  that  near  latitude 
34  dcg.  north,  connects  it  with  Texas;  that  near  latitude  41  deg.  30  min. 
north,  connects  it  with  Oregon :  and  the  three  gaps  in  the  CJalifornia 
mountains,  connect  the  two  great  sections  or  valleys,  at  the  most 
important  points  ;  and  thus,  not  only  gives  this  country,  ready  and  easy 
access  to,  and  commerce  with,  the  family  of  republics ;  but  also,  render 
intercommunication  easy,  and  transportation  cheap,  from  one  portion  of 
the  country  to  another.  But  these  are  not  all  the  advantages,  to  be  de- 
rived from  the  peculiarities  of  this  country.  These  natural  walls,  which 
ahnostentirelyinclose  the  whole  country,  afford  it  perfect  security  against 
an  invading  foe,  from  those  quarters.  Nature,  as  if  designing  to  ensure 
more  perfect  security  to  that  countr}',  has,  in  erecting  the  great  walls, 
which  inclose  it,  heaped  mountains,  upon  mountains,  whose  heads,  now 
mingle,  with  the  clouds  above ;  but  lest  these  even  might  not  afford  suffi- 
cient security,  they  are  thickly,  deeply  covered,  with  perpetual  snow,  or 
eternal  sand,  either  of  which,  is  equally  forbidding,  to  the  approach  of 
man  or  beast. 

Having  given  this  brief  description  of  the  mountains,  I  will  next  notice 
the  various  rivers,  the  most  important  of  which,  is  the  Colorado  of  the 
west,  or  Green  river.  This  great  river  is  to  California,  wdiat  the  Col- 
umbia is  to  Oregon,  the  Mississippi  to  the  United  States,  or  the  Amazon, 
to  South  America.  It  rises  near  latitude  43  deg.  north,  its  head  watei^s 
interlocking  with  those  of  the  Platte;  its  general  course  is  about  south, 
southwest,  to  hs  emboguing,  at  the  Gulf  of  California,  near  latitude  32 
deg.  north.  Following  its  meanders,  its  length  is  about  twelve  hundred 
miles,  about  two  thirds  of  which  distance,  its  course  is  very  serpentine,  and 
much  interrupted,  by  innumerable  rapids,  cascades  and  deep  chasms  or 
channels.  Its  vast  torrents  of  water,  rushing  and  lashing  over  the  for- 
mer, foaming  and  dashing  through  the  latter,  make  the  very  welkin  ring, 
sending  their  misty  spray  in  volumes  to  the  clouds.  As  might  be  ex- 
pected, these  repeated  interruptions  almost  entirely  destroy  its  navigation, 
for  about  eight  hundred  miles.  The  remainder  of  its  distance  is  much 
less  interrupted,  but  its  navigation  is  also  here  seriously  interrupted,  with 
the  exception  of  about  one  hundred  miles,  from  its  mouth,  which  are 
without  interruption,  and  which  are  navigable  for  vessels  of  two  hundred 
Ions  burthen.  The  greater  portion  of  this  river  from  i.ts  source,  lies 
through  a  very  broken,  mountainous  country,  breaking  through  lofty 
mountains,  pouring  over  high  cliffs,  down  vast  perpendicular  cataracts,  and 


TO    OREGON    AND    CALIFORNIA.  73 

into  deep  chasms,  with  perpehdicular  basaltic  walls,  five  hundred  feet  in 
height.  The  latter  part  of  its  distance,  for  four  or  five  hundred  miles,  is 
through  alternate  rollino;  hills,  undulating-  plains,  and  beautiful  valleys 
and  prairies.  All  the  different  tributaries,  of  the  northern  portion  of  this 
river,  water  an  extremely  mountainous,  sterile,  and  entirely  worthless  re- 
gion, with  the  exception  of  the  limited,  though  numerous  valleys,  which 
are  interspersed  among  the  mountains.  But  the  various  tributaries  of  the 
southern  portion  of  this  river,  water  many  extensive  plains,  beautiful 
prairies,  and  fertile  valleys.  Its  tributaries  from  the  north,  in  the  south- 
ern part,  interlock  with  those  of  the  Sacramento,  and  they  water  much 
the  most  extensive  and  fertile  regions.  The  Colorado  and  its  tributaries, 
water  much  of  the  northern  portion,  most  of  the  southern,  and  all  the 
eastern  portion  of  Upper  California.  The  tide  sets  up  this  river  about 
one  hundred  miles,  the  extent  to  which  it  is  navigable,  and  very  much 
aids  its  navigation  to  that  extent.  Many  portions  of  this  river,  its  entire 
extent,  will  be  found  to  be  navigable  for  short  distances,  and  although  it 
will  require  repeated,  and  in  many  places,  extensive  portages,  yet  it  will 
be  found  serviceable,  for  purposes  of  navigation,  in  all  the  different  por- 
tions of  the  country,  through  which  it  passes. 

The  Sacramento  is  the  next  river  in  importance,  and  although,  it  is  a 
less  stream  than  the  Colorado,  yet  in  many  respects,  it  is  even  more  im- 
portant than  tJie  Colorado,  especially  as  it  waters  all  of  the  most  fertile, 
and  expensive  valleys  of  that  country,  and  as  it  empties  its  vast  torrents 
of  water,  into  the  great  bay  of  St.  Francisco.  It  rises  in  the  California 
mountains,  by  two  distinct  heads,  the  one  of  which,  is  near  latitude  41° 
north,  and  the  other  is  near  latitude  38°  north.  The  course  of  the  for- 
mer of  these,  to  their  coalluence,  is  south  southwest,  and  that  of  the  lat- 
ter, is  west  by  north.  Their  junction,  is  near  latitude  40°  north,  and 
near  longitude  117°  Vv^est,  above  which,  in  their  course,  they  receive  in- 
numerable small  tributaries,  both  from  the  north  and  south,  which  swell 
their  v/aters  to  immense  volumes.  From  the  junction  of  these  branches, 
the  general  course  of  the  ri\  er  to  its  mouth,  is  south  west,  receiv- 
ing in  its  course,  a  river,  which  I  shall  cad  Dry  river,  from  the  north, 
ajid  Feather  river,  the  Ajnorican  fork,  and  the  Tulare  from  the 
south.  Its  length  is  about  eight  hundred  miles,  following  its  meanders 
about  three  hundred  miles  of  which,  are  navigable  without  interruption, 
for  vessels  and  steamboats  ;  and  it  may  be  rendered  navigable,  to  a  much 
greater  e:-ilent,  with  very  little  expense.  By  actual  survey,  it  has  been 
determined  to  be  navigable  for  vessels  of  two  hundred  tons,  about  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles  from  its  mouth.  From  the  confluence  of  its  two 
branches,  to  its  mouth,  it  waters  a  vastly  extensive,  and  fertile  valley, 
while  above  that  point,  each  of  the  branches  pour  their  waters,  alternate- 
ly over  rapids,  down  cascades,  through  mountains  ;  and  winding  their  way 
amid  undulating  plaines,  roiling  prairies,  and  fertile,  thoughsmall  valleys, 
they  finally  contribute  largely,  in  forming  the  great  Sacramento.  The 
tide  flows  up  this  river,  about  one  hundred  and  lifty  miles,  which  adds 
much  to  its  safe  and  convenient  navigation.  Dry  river  rises  in  the  Kla- 
met  range,  near  latitude  41°  north,  whence  it  runs  southeast,  about  thirty 
miles,  then  forming  a  semi  circle,  it  runs  nearly  parallel  with  the  Sacra- 
mento, but  in  the  opposite  direction,  when  finally,  it  empties  into  that 
river,  near  latitude  40°  north.  Its  length  is  about  one  hundred  and  forty 
9 


74  THE   EMIGRANTS'    GUIDE 

miles,  including  its  meanders ;  it  waters  a  large  portion,  of  the  great  val- 
ley of  the  Sacramento,  as  well  as  several  limited  valleys,  in  the  mountains, 
in  which,  it  has  its  source.  Some  portions  of  the  country,  immediately 
upon  this  river,  are  entirely  sterile,  being  mere  beds  of  sand  and  gravel ; 
but  they  are  comparatively,  very  small  in  extent.  It  is  from  the  fact  of  its 
watering  these  sandy  and  dry  sections,  that  I  have  deemed  the  name.  Dry 
river  appropriate.  There  are  several  other  small  streams,  putting  into  the 
Sacramento,  from  the  north,  which  also  rise  in  the  Klamet  range,  and 
enter  the  Sacramento,  either  by  subterraneous  mouths,  or  by  percolation. 
There  are  others  of  these  subterfluent  streams,  the  waters  of  which,  alter- 
nately sink  below,  and  rise  to  the  surface,  all  of  which,  enter  into  the  Sac- 
ramento, or  some  lake,  either  at  the  surface,  or  through  some  cavernous 
entrance.  There  are  many  more  of  this  kind  of  tributaries  on  the  north, 
than  on  the  south  side  of  the  Sacramento,  and  however  extraordinary 
they  may  be,  they  are  found  to  be  most  admirably  adapted,  to  the  pur- 
poses of  irrigation. 

The  first  tributary  of  the  Sacramento,  on  the  south  side,  which  I  shall 
notice,  is  the  Feather  river,  which  also  rises  in  the  California  mountains, 
near  latitude  38°  north.  Running  thence,  in  a  direction  nearly  north- 
west, it  pursues  a  very  surpentine  course,  through  a  most  fertile  region  of 
country,  and  finally  empties  into  the  Sacramento,  at  latitude  39°  01' 45" 
north.  Its  length  is  about  two  hundred  miles,  fifty  or  sixty  miles  of 
which,  will  be  found  to  be  navigable,  for  steamboats,  of  light  draught,  the 
greater  part  of  the  year.  This  river,  together  with  its  various  small  trib- 
utaries, waters  one  of  the  most  fertile,  and  admirable  regions,  in  Califor- 
nia. It  takes  its  name  from  the  fact,  of  its  being  a  place  of  general  resort, 
for  the  various  feathered  tribes,  which  are  said  to  congregate  upon  its  wa- 
ters, and  in  its  immediate  vicinity,  in  such  immense  numbers,  that  one 
person  may,  with  very  little  difficulty,  kill  several  hundreds  in  a  very  few 
hours.  So  numerous  are  they  said  to  be,  in  fact,  that,  in  their  confused 
and  conflicting  bustling,  they  strew  the  earth  with  feathers  for  many  miles 
up  and  down  'the  stream,  hence  the  Mexicans  call  it  "rio  de  las  Plumas," 
the  river  of  Feathers.  The  next  tributary  of  importance,  on  this  side 
of  the  Sacramento,  is  the  American  fork,  which  rises  in  the  California 
mountains,  near  latitude  37°  north.  Its  general  course  is  northwest,  and 
its  length  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles.  It  empties  into  the  Sacra- 
mento at  latitude  38°  46'  42"  north,  about  one  milea  bove  New  Helvetia. 
This  river  also  waters  a  large  portion  of  the  valley  of  the  Sacramento,  as 
well  as  a  rich,  productive  region  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mountains,  consist- 
ing of  elevated  plains,  rolling  hills,  and  small,  rich  valleys.  The  Ameri- 
can Fork,  cannot  be  said  to  be  navigable  for  any  other  crafts  than  canoes, 
boats  and  barges,  and  for  those  only  during  high  water,  though  it  is  a  most 
beautiful  stream. 

There  is  one  other  tributary  emptying  into  the  Sacramento  from  the 
south,  which  I  shall  notice  when  I  shall  have  done  with  the  Sacramento 
and  its  tributaries.  The  tributary  here  alluded  to,  is  called  the  Tulare, 
which  is  the  second  river  in  importance,  in  all  the  northern  portion  of  the 
country,  and  the  third  river  in  all  California  It  takes  its  rise  in  the  Cal- 
ifornia mountains,  near  latitude  36°  north,  and  its  general  course  is  nearly 
northwest  to  its  mouth,  where  it  empties  into  the  Sacramento,  a  few 
miles  above  the  entrance  of  that  river,  into  the  bay  of  St.  Francisco.  Its 
length  is  about  four  hundred  miles,  two  hundred  of  which,  are  navigable 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALrFORNIA.  75 

in  ordinary  stages  of  water,  for  steam-boats  of  light  draught,  such  for  in- 
stance, as  those  which  ply  upon  the  Ohio  and  the  Upper  Mississippi  rivers. 
This  river  also  waters  a  vast  extent,  of  the  great  California  valley,  as  well 
as  many  rolling  prairies,  extensive  plains,  and  that  hilly  and  mountainous 
region,  in  which  it  takes  its  source.  It  also  has  numerous  small  tributa- 
ries, which  water  a  great  extent  of  fine,  rich  country,  none  of  which,  are 
of  any  importance  for  the  purposes  of  navigation.  Just  below  the  conflux, 
of  this  river  and  the  Sacramento,  there  is  a  large  island,  which  is  formed 
by  the  divergence  and  re-union  of  these  rivers.  This  island  is  about  four 
miles  in  length,  and  from  its  peculiar  position,  especially  its  contiguity  to 
the  mouths,  of  these  great  rivers,  and  the  bay  of  St.  Francisco,  it  will 
eventually,  be  found  of  great  importance,  although  it  is  now  considered 
entirely  valueless. 

There  are  several  other  streams,  which  empty  into  the  bay  of  St.  Fran- 
cisco, both  from  the  north  and  the  south,  none  of  which  are  navigable, 
but  they  are  highly  important,  as  they  water  all  the  country  in  the  vicini- 
ty of  that  bay,  which  otherwise  would  be  wholly  worthless.  There  are 
also,  several  rivers  of  considerable  importance,  in  the  neighborhood  of 
the  coast,  and  which  empty  into  the  ocean,  some  of  which,  °are  also, 
worthy  of  a  brief  notice.  The  principal  of  these  is  the  Russian  river, 
which  has  its  source  in  the  Klamet  range,  near  latitude  41  deg.  north,  run- 
ning thence,  in  a  direction,  about  west  southwest,  to  the  coast,  where  it 
empties,  near  latitude  38°  55'  42"  north.  Its  length  is  estimated  at  two 
hundred  and  twenty  miles,  of  which,  sixty  or  seventy  miles  are  suscepti- 
ble of  steam  boat  navigation,  the  greater  part  of  the  residue,  is  navigable 
only  for  canoes  and  boats.  The  tide  flows  up  this  river  about  seventy 
miles  which  will  very  much,  facilitate  its  navigation.  An  extremely 
mountainous  and  broken  region,  is  watered  by  this  river,  yet  there  are 
several  very  extensive  plains,  as  well  as  numerous  small  and  fertile  val- 
leys, upon  the  main  river  and  its  various  tributaries.  There  is  also  another 
river,  in  this  portion  of  the  country,  of  which,  however,  I  have  had  occa- 
sion to  speak,  upon  a  former  page,  in  describing  the  rivers  of  Oregon.  It 
is  the  Klamet  river,  for  a  further  description  of  which,  the  reader  is  refer- 
red to  the  description  before  given.  The  only  remaining  river  in  the  vi- 
cinity of  the  coast,  which  I  deem  worthy  of  notice,  is  that  which  empties 
into  the  bay  of  Monterey,  near  lititude  37S  north.  It  has  its  source  in  the 
California  mountains,  near  latitude  36*  north,  thence  pursues  a  course, 
about  west  by  north,  through  alternate  rolling  prairies,  fertile  plains  and 
valleys.  It  is  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  in  length,  no  part  of  which 
can  be  said  to  be  navigable,  for  any  other  crafts  than  boats,  barges  and 
canoes.  The  flow  of  the  tide  extends  up  this  stream,  about  twenty  miles, 
though  not  in  such  manner,  as  to  facilitate  its  navigation. 

The  only  river  which  remains  to  be  noticed,  is  the  great  Bear  river, 
which,  although  described  as  a  river  of  Oregon,  is  properly,  a  river  of 
California ;  but  as  I  have  described  it  sufficiently  upon  a  former  page,  I 
shall  here  give  it  mere  passing  notice.  It  heads  near  latitude  42°  north, 
and  pursues  a  course,  nearly  west  by  south,  to  the  great  Salt  lake,  into 
which  it  flows,  near  latitude  41°  north.  Its  length  is  about  two  hundred 
miles,  no  part  of  which,  can  properly  be  said  to  be  navigable,  otherwise 
than  for  boats  and  canoes.  A  large  portion  of  the  country  watered  by 
this  river,  is  extremely  mountainous  and  sterile,  but  the  Bear  river  valley, 
through  which  it  lies,  is  a  vastly  extensive  valley,  and  many  portions  of 


76  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

it,  possess  more  than  ordinary  fertility  and  productiveness.  This  river,  as 
well  as  its  valleyjderives additional  importance,  from  their  proximity,  to 
this  great  lake,  which  will,  in  the  course  of  time,  undoubtedly,  become 
the  nucleus  of  an  extensive  settlement,  in  the  eastern  section  of  both  Or- 
egon and  California.  From  the  best  information  which  I  have  been  able 
to  obtain,  in  relation  to  this  lake,  its  northern  extremity  extends  very 
nearly  to  latitude  42°  north,  but  not  beyond  it,  from  which  it  appears,  that 
it  is  situated  entirely  in  California.  It  is  about  two  hundred  and  forty 
miles  long,  and  averages  from  forty  to  sixty  miles  in  width.  Its  waters 
are  much  more  highly  impregnated  with  salt,  than  those  of  the  ocean. 
The  country  contiguous  to  this  lake,  in  each  direction,  is,  generally,  ste- 
rile, but  the  surrounding  country,  in  its  vicinity,  is,  usually  rich,  and  highly 
productive. 

The  rise  in  the  rivers  of  this  country,  like  those  of  Oregon,  is  at  differ- 
ent seasons  of  the  year,  in  the  different  streams,  depending  upon  the  re- 
gions in  which  they  have  their  sources.  Those  which  rise  in  the  Cali- 
fornia mountains,  have  their  annual  rise  in  the  months  of  February  and 
November.  The  rises  are  generally  gradual,  but  they  extend  to  a  very 
great  extent,  rising  very  frequently,  eighteen  or  twenty  feet  perpendicularly, 
and  submerging  much  of  the  low  country,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mouths, 
of  the  different  rivers,  during  the  continuance  of  the  high  waters.  The 
effect,  of  this  inundation  is,  however,  rather  favorable  than  otherwise,  as 
all  those  sections  of  the  country,  which  have  been  thus  overflowed,  pro- 
duce a  much  more  luxuriant  growth  of  vegetation,  than  they  would  other- 
wise do,  which  continues  perfectly  green,  presenting  a  large  extent,  of 
springly  verdure,  even  in  autumn,  when  the  vegetation  of  most  other  por- 
tions, is  dried  and  transformed,  from  tlie  delightful  green  of  May  and 
June,  to  the  natural  hay  of  October.  Hence  it  is,  that  these  portions  of 
the  country,  are  here  considered  highly  valuable,  for  the  same  reason,  that 
similar  portions  of  the  country,  are  considered  eritirely  worthless,  in  Or- 
egon and  elsewhere.  In  those  rivers  taking  their  rise  in  the  Cordilleras 
or  Rocky  mountains,  the  overflow,  takes  place  here,  as  in  Oregon,  during 
the  months  of  May  and  June,  of  each  year.  The  annual  rises,  of  all  the 
rivers  of  this  country,  are  to  be  attributed  to  the  same  cause,  as  stated 
upon  another  page,  in  reference  to  the  rise  of  the  rivers  of  Oregon.  The 
water  of  all  these  rivers,  like  that  of  those  of  Oregon,  are  i)erfectly 
transparent,  and  pure,  so  much  so,  in  truth,  that  the  bottoms  of  tlie  rivers, 
are,  not  unfrequently,  seen  thirty  or  forty  feet,  beneath  the  surface  of  the 
water.  They,  from  their  extraordinary  purity,  possess  very  little  or  no 
fertilizing  properties,  hence  the  lands  subject  to  their  annual  submersions, 
derive  no  additional  fertility  from  them ;  and  hence,  they  are  beneflted 
by  the  overflows,  only  by  the  accumulation  of  moisture,  which  liowever, 
in  this  arid  region,  is  a  very  important  consideration. 

There  are  but  very  few  islands,  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of  the 
coast,  yet  there  are  three,  which  may  perhaps,  be  found  worthy  of  a  par- 
tial description.  St.  Catalina  is  the  principal  of  them,  which  is  ^^ituated 
about  fifteen  miles  from  the  coast,  and  near  latitude  33  degrees  and  40  min, 
north.  Its  greatest  length  is  about  thirty  miles,  from  east  to  west,  and 
its  width  twelve  miles,  from  north  to  south,  giving  an  area  of  about  three 
hundred  and  sixty  miles.  The  next  of  these  in  importance,  is  Santa 
Cruz,  which  is  about  sixty  miles  north  from  St.  Catalina,  and  nearly  the 
same  distance  from  the  coast.    Its  length  being  twelve  miles,  and  its  width 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  77 

six  miles;  it  has  a  superficies  of  seventy-two  miles.  The  other  island  al- 
luded to,  is  St,  Clement,  which  is  still  less  in  extent,  than  Santa  Cruz, 
having;  a  surface  only,  of  about  twenty  four  square  miles.  All  of  these 
islands  possess  a  most  productive  and  fertile  soil,  but  they,  usually,  pre- 
sent an  extremely  broken,  and  mountainous  surface.  They  are  all  said 
to  be  most  admirably  adapted,  both  to  the  purposes  of  grazing  and  agri- 
culture. Abounding  with  game  of  various  kinds,  and  especially  the  fur- 
bearing  animals,  they  are  places  of  theannual  resort,  of  hunters  and  trap- 
pers. Each  of  these  has  an  ample  supply  of  good  timber,  and  fresh 
water,  as  well  as  several  very  good  and  convenient  harbors.  These 
islands  are,  as  yet,  used  merely  as  repositories  of  smuggled  goods,  for 
which  purpose,  they  are  most  admirably  suited,  and  extensively  occupied, 
but  they  will,  eventually,  no  doubt,  be  converted  into  most  delightful,  and 
admirable  residences,  for  retiring  Selkirks  and  bioken-down  politicians. 

As  the  face  of  the  country  is  merely  alluded  to,  in  the  description  of 
of  the  mountains  and  rivers,  it  may,  perhaps,  be  advisable  here  to  give  a 
further  description  of  the  surface,  of  each  section.  The  greater  part  of 
the  Western  section,  consists  of  vastly  extensive  plains  and  valleys;  but 
it  also  has  many  sections  of  high,  rolling  hills,  and  less  elevated  moun- 
tains, besides  the  •■nain  ranges  of  mountains  btfore  described.  The  prin- 
cipal valley  of  this  section  is,  the  great  valley  of  the  Sacramento  and  its 
various  tributaries:  it  extends  from  the  base  of  the  Klamet  moun- 
tains, nearly  to  laditude  36  dcg  north,  and  from  an  elevated  range  of 
country,  upon  the  coast,  entirely  to  the  California  mountains.  This  val- 
ley, although  extending  in  each  direction,  as  above  stated,  does  not  include 
ths  entire  country,  within  those  limits,  but  it  comprises  much  the  greater 
part,  of  all  that  portion  of  country.  Within  the  same  portion  of  country, 
however,  there  are  several  ranges  of  high  lands,  consisting,  in  many 
places,  of  high  sv/ells  and  hills,  and  in  others,  of  elevated  plains  and 
rolling  prairies.  About  two  thirds  of  all  the  country,  comprised  within 
the  above  limits,  is  properly  contained,  in  the  valley  of  the  Sacramento, 
and  its  tributaries,  which  is  much  the  most  fertile  portion,  of  the  same  ex- 
tent, in  all  California.  That  portion  of  this  valley,  which  lies  immedi- 
ately upon  the  Sacramento  river,  extends  from  its  mouth,  at  the  bay  of 
St.  Francisco,  to  the  base  of  the  California  mountains,  a  distance  of  about 
four  hundred  miles,  and  averages  about  thiity  miles  in  width,  on  the  north 
side,  and  about  fifty  miles  on  the  south  side.  That  portion  of  it,  lying  on 
the  Tulare  river,  generally  averages  about  twenty  miles,  on  each 
side  of  the  river,  to  the  base  of  the  California  mountains,  a  distance  of 
about  three  hundred  miles,  from  its  confluence  with  the  Sacramento.  Be- 
sides these  great  valleys,  which  constitute  the  greater  portion,  of  what  is 
called  the  Sacramento  valley,  there  are  various  valleys,  upon  all  the  dif- 
ferent tributaries  of  the  Sacramento,  which  also  form  part  of  that  valley. 
All  of  these  valleys  possess  a  soil,  which  is  scarcely  paralleled,  for  fer- 
tility and  productiveness,  which,  however,  Avill  more  fully  appear,  from 
what  will  be  said  in  reference  to  the  soil,  and  productions.  South  of  the 
Sacramento  valley,  there  are  also  numerous  valleys,  of  very  considerable 
extent,  both  upon  all  the  various  smaller  streams,  which  empty  into  the 
ocean,  and  the  various  tributaries  of  the  Colorado  of  the  west.  All  the 
valleys,  in  the  southern  portion  of  this  section,  are  equally  as  fertile  and 
productive,  as  those  of  the  Sacramento.     That  portion,  however,  consists 


78  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

chiefly  of  plains  and  prairies,  which  are  also  very  productive,  covered 
with  a  great  variety  of  vegetation,  of  extraordinary  growth. 

The  Eastern  section  also,  has  several  very  extensive  valleys,  the  largest 
of  which,  are  found  upon  the  various  tributaries  of  the  Colorado,  many 
of  which,  average  from  fifty  to  a  thousand  square  miles  in  extent; 
but  the  valleys  of  this  section,  are  comparatively  small,  though  extremely 
fertile  and  productive.  Through  all  portions  of  this  section,  there  is 
a  much  greater  proportior.  of  elevated  and  broken  country,  than  in 
the  Western  section.  High,  rolling  prairies,  elevated  plains,  and  moder- 
ately elevated,  hilly  regions,  are  found  in  all  the  various  portions 
of  this  section,  which  yield  the  greatest  variety  of  vegetation,  of  most  lux- 
uriant growth.  The  valley  of  the  great  Bear  river,  which  is  also  situa- 
ted in  this  section,  is  a  valley  of  very  considerable  extent,  and  of  more 
than  ordinary  fertility,  but  that  portion  of  this  great  valley,  in  the  imme- 
diate neighborhood  of  the  great  Salt  lake,  is  entirely  sterile  and  unpro- 
ductive, as  is  all  that  portion  of  the  country  contiguous  to  that  lake.  Upon 
the  coast  of  the  whole  extent  of  Upper  California,  from  north  to  south, 
there  is  an  elevated  range  of  country,  consisting  chiefly,  of  hills,  high, 
rolling,  broken  prairies,  and  elevated  plains.  Both  the  Western  and  Eas- 
tern sections  are,  in  many  places,  intersected  in  various  directions,  with 
spurs  of  the  different  ranges  of  mountains,  and  ranges  of  elevated,  bro- 
ken and  hilly  country  ;  but  much  less  of  this  kind  of  country,  is  found  in 
the  Western,  than  in  the  Eastern  section.  As  to  give  a  particular  de- 
scription, of  each  portion  of  this  country,  would  much  transcend  the  lim- 
its of  this  work,  and  my  original  purpose,  I  shall  leave  this  branch  of  the 
subject,  and  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  those  of  more  practical  im- 
portance. 

The  bays  and  harbors  next  claim  our  attention,  and  that  deserving  of 
the  first  and  principal  notice,  is  the  bay  of  St.  Francisco,  which  is  situated 
at  latitude  38  deg.  north,  and  extends  about  forty  miles  into  the  interior, 
in  a  direction  about  north,  north  east  from  its  entrance.  Its  waters  are 
securely  confined  within  its  bed,  by  an  iron-bound  coast,  which  is  gene- 
rally composed  of  solid  basaltic  rock.  The  country  adjacent  to  this  bay, 
is  a  very  broken  and  hilly  region,  but  very  fertile,  producing  oats,  clover, 
and  the  like,  with  much  profusion.  The  entrance  of  this  bay,  from  the 
Pacific,  is  about  one  mile  wide,  upon  each  side  of  which,  is  a  high  ledge 
of  basaltic  rock,  about  tv^^o  hundred  feet,  above  the  surface  of  the  water. 
From  these  points,  on  each  side  of  the  entrance,  the  bay  gradually  ex- 
pands, to  eight  or  ten  miles,  in  extent,  from  north  to  south,  and  about 
twelve  miles,  from  east  to  west.  At  the  extreme  eastern  portion,  of  this 
bay,  thus  formed,  its  hilly  and  rocky  banks  gradually  contract,  so 
aS  to  leave  a  space,  only  of  about  two  miles,  between  the  rocky, 
hilly  shores,  which  thus,  forms  a  second  entrance,  into  another  bay, 
of  greater  extent,  than  that  just  described.  At  this  entrance,  the  high, 
rolling,  basaltic  banks,  again  gradually  diverge,  about  ten  miles,  when 
they  again  contract,  leaving  a  space  of  about  one  mile  between  them, 
which  is  about  eight  miles  from  the  entrance,  last  mentioned,  and  thus, 
another  spacious  bay  is  formed.  A  third  and  more  extensive  bay  is 
formed  in  a  similar  manner,  the  eastern  extremity  of  which,  is  about  forty 
miles  eastward,  from  the  coast,  where  it  receives  the  Sacramento.  The 
bay  last  alluded  to,  is  twelve  miles  in  extent,  from  east  to  west,  and  about  : 
fifteen  from  north  to  south,  and  like  the  others  described,  it  affords  the 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  79 

most  extensive  and  secure  anchorage.  From  this  description  of  the  great 
bay  of  St.  Francisco,  it  is  seen,  that  instead  of  one  bajs  there  are  three 
vastly  extensive  bays,  which,  however,  are  all  connected,  formin'.r  the 
bay  of  St.  Francisco.  There  are  several  small  islands  in  this  bay,  the 
largest  of  which,  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  the  first  bay.  within  full 
view  of  the  entrance,  from  the  ocean.  It  is  about  five  miles  Icno-  and 
three  in  width,  and  has  a  very  rough  and  broken  surface,  which  is  cover- 
ed here  and  there  with  timber,  of  a  small  growth,  and  an  abundance  of 
vegetation.  •  It  is  admirably  suited  to  the  purposes  of  grazing,  as  it  not 
only  produces  the  various  grasses,  and  oats  and  clover,  in  great  profusioD 
but  also,  a  great  abundance  of  good  fresh  water.  Large  herds  of  fine 
cattle,  are  now,  kept  upon  it,  by  a  Spaniard,  who  resides  in  the  lower  part 
of  the  country. 

The  next  large  island  alluded  to,  is  located  on  the  south  side  of  the 
same  bay,  fronting  the  town  of  Yerba  Buena.  It  is  also  depastured,  but 
by  herds  of  wild  goats,  which  have  been  placed  upon  it,  by 'a  foreigner, 
who  resides  at  Yerba  Euena.  Besides  these  islands,  there  are  several 
others  in  this  bay,  which  appear  to  be  composed  entirely  of  basaltic  rock, 
and  hence,  produce  no  kind  of  vegetation,  but  are  ploces  of  resort  for  the 
innumerable  fowls  of  prey,  which  abound  in  that  region.  One  of  these 
rocky  islands,  is  situated  directly  in  front  of  the  entrance,.from  the  ocean, 
and  is  about  one  fourth  of  a  mile  in  diameter.  The  contiguity  of  this 
island  to  the  entrance,  and  its  immediate  opposition  to  that  point,  renders 
it  very  important,  as  a  few  guns  planted  upon  it,  and  well  manned,  would 
with  al!  ease,  perfectly  command^  the  entrance.  But  facilities  for  com- 
manding this  entrance,  are  not  wanting,  for  a  few  guns  upon  either  side 
of  it,  would  sink  a  whole  fleet,  that  should  attempt  a  hostile  ingression. 
Outside  of  this  bay,  also,  and  within  a  few  miles  of  the  entrance,  is  another 
vast  rocky  island,  rearing  its  ancient  and  majestic  head,  several  hundred 
feet  above  the  lashing  surf,  and  roaring  billows  below,  as  if  designed  by 
nature,  to  point  out  the  entrance,  into  that  great  bay  of  bays,  "a  more 
admirable  and  advantageous  position,  for  a  light-house,  can  scarcely  be 
conceived  of,  and  there  is  but  little  doubt,  but  that  those  who  visit  St 
Francisco,  two  year  hence,  instead  of  seeing  a  massivo,  dark  rock  looking 
out  upon  the  mighty  deep,  at  the  mouth  of  that  bay,  they  will  there  be- 
hold, a  brilliant  luminary  of  the  ocean.  From  what  has  already  been 
I  said,  it  must  be  apparent  to  all,  that  there  are  few  bays,  if  any,  in  any 
I  part  of  the  world,  which  surpass  this,  for  security  of  harbor,  and  extent 
I  of  anchorage.  It  has  been  well  said,  that  ''in  this  bay,  all  the  fleets  and 
,  navies  of  the  whole  world,  could  ride,  in  perfect  safety."  This  bay  alone, 
I  would  answer  all  the  commercial  purposes  of  California,  in  all  time  to 
come.  There  is  ample  water  at  the  entrance,  for  vessels  of  the  largest 
class,  whether  during  the  ebb  or  flow  of  the  tide,  which,  in  this  bay,  rises 
about  eighteen  feet  perpendicular.  All  things  being  considered,  I  am  of 
the  opinion,  that  a  harbor  can  not  be  found,  equal  in  all  respects,  to  that 
of  the  bay  of  St.  Francisco.  It  is  of  the  greatest  importance,  not  only  to 
•  California,  but  also  to  all  commercial  governments  of  the  world,  whose 
ships  of  war,  merchant  ships,  or  whalers,  cruise  in  the  Pacific,  as  it  aflx)rds 
them  the  most  extensive  anchorage,  and  secure  harbor,  which  is  sur- 
rounded by  one  of  the  most  fertile  countries,  in  the  known  world,  where 
all  necessary  ship  supplies,  may  be  obtained,  in  any  abundance,  and  upon 
,  the  most  favorable  terms. 


so       .  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE  1 

The  bay  of  Monterey  is  the  next  in  importance,  but  iis  chief  importance 
is  deriv':>d  from  its  central,  and   otherwise  peculiarly  advantageous  posi- 
tion, and  not  from  its  extent  of  anchorage,  or  security  of  harbor.     It  is 
situated  at  latitude  37  deg.  north,  and  is  about  twenty  miles  in  extent,  and 
semicircular  in  form,  afibrding  tolerably  extensive  anchorage,  and  secure 
harbor  against  all  winds,  excepting  those  from  the  west,  and  north  east  which 
drive  almost  directly  into  the  bay,  rendering  the  harbor  very  insecure,  as 
against  those  winds.   As  an  evidence  of  this  fact,  a  vessel  was  stranded  there, 
a  few  years  since,  and  the  v/reck  now  lies  upon  the  beach,  within  a  few 
hundred  yards,  of  the  ordinary  anchorage.     I  was  informed  that  the  cap- 
tain of  this  vessel,  finding  a  wreck  inevitable,  headed  directly  upon  the 
beach,  under  full  sail,  which,  of  course,  had  a  tendency  to  decide  the 
matter  as  to  a  wreck,  as  well  as  to  produce  some  rather  unpleasant  con- 
cussions.    In  this  bay,  as  in  St.  Francisco,  the  tide  rises  about  eighteen 
feet,  and  there  is  also  ample  water,  at  the  entrance  of  this  bay,  as  at  that, 
for  the  reception  of  vessels  of  any  class,  either  during  the  ebb  or  flow  of 
the  tide.     The  entrance  is  also,  very  easily  commanded,  but  it  is  by  no 
means  as  advantageously  situated  in  that  respect,  as  that  of  the  bay  of  St. 
Francisco.     It  is  th;j  opinion,  however,  of  many,  that  the  entrance  of  this 
bay,  c;ni  be  as  effectually  fortified,  as  that  of  any  other,  with  the  appro- 
priate exptiise.     The  chief  importance  attached  to  this  bay  is  derived 
from  the  fact,  of  its  being  contiguous  to  the  seat  of  government,  which  will 
undoubtedly  be  the  case,  until  there  shall  be  some  enlargement  of  the  state, 
either  upon  the  north  or  the  south.     The  bay  of  St  Dipgo  is  also,  a  bay 
of  very  consideraLdi:-  extent,  wliich  is  sitmued  near  latitude  33  deg.  north, 
aflibrding  very  commodious,  and  safe  anchorage.     It  is  about  twenty  miles 
in  extent,  from  its  euirance  to  its  extreme  eastern  portion,  and  it  afihrds 
extensive  anchorage,  and  safe  harbor,  against  all  winds,  excepting  those 
blowing  from  the  soutii,  and  the  southwest.     This  bay  is  also  vastly  im- 
portani^  from  its  loc  il  position,  hfing  in  the  extreme  southern  portion  of 
the  country,  for  widiout  it,  all  that  part  of  the  country,  would  be  entirely 
excluded,  i-Vom  all  comraerci.ii  advantages.     Besides  the  principal  bays 
here  describtd,  llifre  are  several  others,  which,  however,  are  of  much 
less  importance,  ihough  perhaps,  of  suificieni  importimce,  to  require  a 
brief  notice.      (Jft'  ese  the.e  are  but  two,  which  I  shall    notice,  the  one 
of  which,  is  situated  in  ihr'  extreme  northern,  and  the  other  in  the  extreme 
southern  po)tion,  of  the  country,   the  former  is  called  Badago,  and  the 
latter  Colorado.     Bodago  is  near  latitude  40  deg   north,  and  is  about  ' 
twelve  miles  in  extent,  but  the  entrance  is  rather  difficult,  and  the  an- 
chorage unsafe,  and,  at  times,  dangerous  in  the  extreme.     This  bay,  how- 
ever, Too-ether  with  the  harbor,  formed  at  the  mouth  of  the  Klamet  river, 
before  d'escribed,  will  afford  ample  commercial  facilities,  for  the  extreme 
northern  portion.     The  Colorado  is  situated  at  the  mouth  of  the  Colora- 
do of  the  west,  near  latitude  32  deg  north:  it  is  very  spacious,  affording 
extensive  and  secure  anchorage,  for  ships  of  any  class,  shekering  them, 
perfectly,  against  all  winds,  excepting  those  which  blow  directly  from  the 
south.     This  gives  a  brief  view,  of  the  facilities  for  extensive  commerce, 
in  Upper  California,  which  are  seldom,  if  ever,  surpassed. 


to  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA,  81 

CHAPTER  IX. 
A  DESCRIPTON  OF  CALIFORNIA. 

%i7  of  the  Western  section  ;  variety  of;  fertility  of.  Prevailiufr  rock.  Pw>- 
'  portion  of  cultivable  and  pasturable  lands.  Soil  of  fJastern  section  ;  com- 
parative fertility  of  Variety  of  rock.  Proportion  ofarahle  and  grazitig 
lands.  Mineral  resources.  Climate  of  the  Western  section.  Mean  tern- 
perature.  Mildness  and  uniformity  ;  causes  of.  Comparative  differmc^ 
'of  temperature.,  on  the  east  and  west  sides  of  the  Rocky  mountainn.  GreaJ, 
Tariety  of  temperature.  The  rainy  sea.son.  Dry  seasons.  Climate  of 
jEastern  section  ;  less  uyiiform.  Great  e.rcess  of  heat  and  cold.  Health, 
Absence  of  all  febrifacient  causes.  Pecidiar  adaptation  to  the  prow^otion 
(if  health.  Productions  of  the  II e.^te>-n  section.  Indigenous  productions. 
\\mber  ;  variety  of  Oats,  clover,  fia..v  and  hemp  ;  hLvun'ani  g-rotcth  of. 
Cidtivated  productions.  Seven-headed,  uheat.  The  extraordinary  pro- 
duct of  whecU.  Time  of  sowing  and  harvesting.  Corn  ;  yield  of ;  time 
of  planting.  Growing  of  cotton,  rice  and  cane  ;  adaptation  of  the  soil 
wid  climate  to.  Vegetables;  when  planted  and  gathered.  Fruits;  rari- 
eiyof.     Pivductions  of  the  Eastern  section  ;  spontaneous  and  cidtivated. 

The  soil  is  extremely  varied,  not  only  in  the  two  sections,  but  also  in  tb« 
different  portions  of  each  section  ;  the  hills  and  mountains  b'.ing  entirely 
sterile,  and  valleys  and  phnns  extreintdy  fertile.     'Hiat   of  the  valleys  is 
vastly  rich  and  productive,  so  much  so  in  fact,  that  I  think,  I  venture  nothing; 
when  I  say,  that  it  is  not  only  not  5.irpass--d,  but  that  it  is  not  even  equaP 
ed.     The  deep,  rich,  alluvial  soil  of  the  Nile,  in  Egypt,  does  not  afford  a 
parallel.     Remarks  like  these,  I  am  aware,  are  apt  to  be  considered  as 
mere  gratuitous  assumptions  ;  but  t5  ascertain  how  far  they  are  sustained 
by  fact,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  sequel,  especially  that  pait  of  it,  which 
treats  of  the  productions,  which  it  is  believed,  will  not  only  convince  him 
of  their  truth,  but  may.  perhaps,  induce   him  to    indulge  in  assumptions 
and  speculations,  even  more  enlarged.     The  soil  of  the  various  valleys 
of  the  Western  section,  varies   from  a  rich,  alluvial,  to  a  deep,    black, 
vegetable  loam,  upon  strata  of  sand,  gravel,  clay  or  trap  rock.     That  of 
the  plains,  is,  principally,  a  deep,  brown,  vegetable  loam,  or  decomposed 
basalt,  with  a  substratum,  of  stiff  clay,  or  gravel  and  sand.     And   that  ol 
the  hills,  is  chiefly,  a  brown,  sandy  loam,  or  a  loose,  gravelly  soil.     The 
mountains,  and  most  of  the  more  elevated  hills,  are  generally  entirely 
barren,  and  consist  principally  of  primitive  rocks,  such  as  talcon  slate, 
atid  other  argillaceous  stone,  with  hornbhmdand  granite.     The   less  ele- 
vated hills  consist,  chiefly,  of  basalt,  slate  and  marble.     Gypsum  and  a 
kind  of  white  clay,  are  also  found,  in  many  places;  the  latter  of  which, 
is  very  abundant,  and  which  is  used  extensively  by  the  inhabitants,  for  the 
purpose  of  whitewashing  their  dwelling  houses,  both  externally  and  in- 
ternally.    It  is  also  used  for  the  purpose  of  cleansing,  as  a  substitute  for 
spap,  and  for  this  purpose,  it  is  found  to  be  most  admirably  adapted.     It 
may  be  estimated,  that  about  two  thirds,  of  all  the  Western  section,  are 
cultivable  lands,  and  that  three  fourths  of  it,  including  the  arable  lands, 
axe  pasturable  lands,  to  each  of  which  purposes,  the  whole  section,  to  the 
e%ji£nU  and  in  the  proportions  stated,  is  peculiarly  suited.     The  remaining 
''     10 


m  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

part,  of  this  section,  which  is  the  extremely  mountainous  portion,  is  noted 
for  us  extraordmary  barrenness  and  sterility.  The  soil  of  the  valleys  of 
^e  Eastern  section,  is  in  all  respects,  similar  to  that  of  the  valleys,  of  the 
Western  section  ;  that  of  the  plains  is  a  deep  brown  loam,  with  a  subsoil, 
of  sand  or  clay;  and  that  of  the  hills,  is  usually,  a  light,  brown,  vegetable 
earth,  having  a  substratum  of  gravel,  sand  or  clay.  The  mountains,  and 
hills  like  those  of  the  Western  section,  are  for  the  most  part,  entirely 
sterile,  yet  as  before  remarked,  there  are  many  portions  of  the  hills  and 
mountains  even,  that  are  tolerably  productive.  There  is  a  much  greater 
variety  of  soil  in  this,  than  in  the  Western  section  ;  in  one  day's  ride, 
you  may  pass  over  every  possible  variety  of  soil,  from  the  mosi  fertile,  to 
the  most  barren  and  unproductive.  The  mountains  are,  generally,  com- 
posed  of  talcon  slate,  granite,  hornblend  and  other  primitive  rock,  and  the 
hills  are,  principally,  composed  of  marble,  limestone,  basalt  and  slate.  The 
white  clay  before  spoken  of,  is  also  found  in  this  section,  in  great  abun- 
(knce.  The  proportion  of  barren  land,  is  much  greater  in  this-,  than  hi 
the  Western  section.  As  nearly  as  I  could  ascertain,  about  one  third,  of 
the  whole  section,  is  susceptible  of  cultivation,  while  about  two  thirds,  in- 
eluding  the  arable  lands,  are  well  suited  to  grazing  purposes,  and  the  re- 
maining third,  for  extraordinary  unfruitfulness,  and  entire  destitution,  of 
all  fecundity,  can  be  surpassed,  only  by  some  portions  of  Oregon, which  are 
seldom,  if  ever  sui-passed.  in  worthlessness. 

^  The  information  which  I  was  able  to  acquire,  does  not  afford  aie  suf!h- 
dent  data,  upon  which  to  predicate  any  very  ac<iurate  conclusions,  in  re^ 
erence  to  the  mmeral  resources  of  California ;  but  sufficient  investio-ar 
tions  have  been  made,  to  determine  that  many  portions,  of  the  mountain- 
ous regions,  abound  with  several  kinds  of  minerals,  such  as  gold,  silver 
iron,  lead  and  coal,  but  to  what  extent,  the  extreme  newness  and  un^ 
explored  state  of  the  country,  utterly  preclude  all  accurate  determination 
It  is,  however,  reported  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  that  some  Mexicans  have, 
recently  discovered  a  section  of  country,  in  the  extreme  interior  of  Cali- 
fornia, which  affords  ample  evidences^  of  the  existence  of  both  gold  and 
silver  ore,  in  greater  or  less  quantities,  for  thirty  leagues  in  extent.  Sine© 
this  report  is  so  very  extraordinary,  and  since  it  originated  as  above  stated, 
the  safest  course  would  be, .to  believe  but  about  half  of  it,  and  then  per- 
haps, we  should  believe  too  much.  Dr.  Sandels,  a  very  able  mimnalo- 
gist,  who  had  for  some  time  been  employed  in  his  profession,  by  the  gov- 
ernment of  Mexico,  spent  four  or  five  months,  in  mineralogical  investiga- 
tion, in  upper  California.  It  was  from  this  gentleman,  that  the  ab«>ve In- 
formation was  derived,  hence  it  is  entitled  to  implicit  reliance. 

The  climate  of  the  Western  section,  is  that  of  perpetual  spring,  having- 
no  excess  of  heat  or  cold,  it  is  the  most  uniform  and  delightful.  The 
mean  temperature,  during  the  year,  is  about  61°  Fahrenheit;  that  o{  the 
spring  is  GG'^;  -that  of  the  summer  70^^ ;  that  of  the  autumn  67«  ;  and 
of  tlie  winter  is  61«  Fahrenheit.  The  mean  temperature  of  the  warmest 
month  is  74«,  and  that  of  the  coldest  month,  is  48°  Fahrenheit.  This 
statement  is  not  designed  to  apply  to  the  entire  Western  section,  for  in 
tlie  extreme  northern  portion,  it  is  rather  colder  than  would  appear  from 
this,  whiie  in  the  extreme  southern  portion,  it  is  r*ther  warmer.  It  is  ap- 
plicable particularly,  to  the  latitude  of  37*' north,  though  very  little  difference 
will  be  found,  in  all  the  various  portions  of  this  section,  which  will  be 
seen  from  the  following  statement.     In  the  extreme  northern  portion, 


V 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  88 

snow  sometimes  falls,  but  it  very  seldom  lies  more  than  two  or  three  hours, 
always  disappearing  at  the  rising  of  the  sun  ;  but  even  here,  running  wa- 
ter never  freezes,  nor  does  standing  water  ever  freeze,  thicker  tlian  com- 
mon window  glass.  In  the  southern  portion,  and  even  a«  far  north  as 
latitude  38°  north,  snow,  frost  and  ice  are  unknown.  An  equability  of 
temperature  is  found,  in  all  portions  of  this  section,  which  very  few  por- 
tions of  the  world  afford,  none,  perhaps,  unless  it  be  some  portions  of  It- 
aly. In  many  portions  of  this  section,  immediately  upon  the  coast,  it  is 
warmer  in  the  winter  season,  than  in  the  summer.  This  is  attributable  to 
the  fact,  of  the  winds  blowing  regularly  from  the  north  or  northwest,  du- 
ring the  summer,  and  from  the  south,  southwest  or  southeast,  during  the 
winter,  which  also  accounts  for  the  extraordinary  mildness  of  the  climate, 
during  all  seasons  of  the  year.  Compared  with  the  climate,  in  the  same 
latitude,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  the  difference  is  almos-t 
incredible.  It  is  milder  on  the  Pacific  coast,  in  latitude  42°  north,  than 
il  is  in  32°  north  on  the  Atlantic  coast,  being  a  difference  of  more  than 
ten  degrees  of  temperature,  in  the  same  latitude.  No  fires  are  required, 
at  any  season  of  the  year,  in  parlors,  offices  or  shops,  hence  fuel  is  never 
required,  for  any  other  than  culinary  purposes.  Many  kinds  of  vegeta- 
bles are  planted,  and  gathered,  at  any  and  every  season  of  the  year,  and 
of  several  kinds  of  grain,  two  crops  are  grown  annually.  Even  in  the 
months  of  December  and  January,  vegetation  is  in  full  bloom,  and  all  na- 
ture wears  a  most  cheering,  and  enclivening  aspect.  It  may  be  truly  said 
of  this  country,  that  "December  is  as  pleasant  as  May."  The  remarks 
here  made,  in  reference  to  the  mildness,  and  uniformity  of  the  climate, 
are  applicable  only  to  the  valleys  and  plains,  for  the  mountains  present 
hut  one  eternal  winter.  Hence  it  is  seen,  that  you  may  here  enjoy  pe- 
rennial spring,  or  perpetual  winter  at  your  option.  Yoa  may  in  a  very 
few  days,  at  any  season  of  tlie  year,  pass  from  regions  of  eternal  verdure, 
to  those  of  perpetual  ice  and  snow,  in  doing  which,  you  pass  through  al- 
most every  possible  variety  of  climate,  from  that  of  the  temperate,  to 
diat  of  the  frigid  zone. 

The  rainy  season  is,  generally,  confined  to  the  winter  months,  during 
which  time,  rains  fall  very  frequently,  though  not  incessantly.  Daring 
all  this  season,  the  weather  is  alternately  rainy  and  clear;  one  third,  per- 
haps, of  the  whole  season  is  rainy,  and  the  residue  is  clear  and  delightful 
weather.  The  rainy  season  here,  although  it  is  confined  to  a  portion  of 
tihe  same  season  of  the  year,  as  that  in  Oregon,  yet  it  differs,  in  many  re- 
spects, from  the  rainy  season,  in  that  country.  There,  the  rains  are  al- 
most incessant,  but  slight,  while  here  they  are  much  less  frequent,  but 
pour  down  in  torrents.  The  only  rain,  which  falls  in  this  country,  is 
during  the  rainy  season,  during  the  residue  of  the  year,  scarcely  a  drop 
of  rain  ever  falls ;  but  there  have  been  a  few  instances  of  its  falling,  as 
late  as  April  and  May,  though  this  is  very  seldom.  In  addition  to  the 
moisture  accumulated  by  the  earth,  during  the  winter  season,  the  vegeta- 
tion always  receives  additional  moisture  from  the  dews,  during  the  sum- 
mer. It  would  seem  that  the  inhabitants  of  a  country,  watered  only  by 
die  rains  of  three  months,  and  the  dews  of  the  residue  of  the  year,  must 
suffer  intensely,  from  the  effects  of  such  continued  drought,  but  such  is 
not  the  case  in  this  country.  The  extraordinary  mildness  of  the  climate, 
tQgether  with  the  falling  of  the  rains,  causes  the  vegetation  to  put  forth 
catiy  in  the  month  of  December,  and  to  mature  in  the  spring,  or  very 


64  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

early  in  the  summer.  So  it  is  of  wheat,  and  other  grains,  being  sown  Ih 
November  or  December,  they  are  matured  in  the  spring,  or  early  in  the 
summer,  and  before  they  are  affected  by  the  droughi.  In  many  portions 
of  the  country,  the  vegetation,  so  far  from  being  injuriously  affected  by 
the  drought,  is  seen  in  full  bloom,  during  every  month  of  the  year.  Thra 
remark,  however,  only  applies  to  a  certain  species  of  vegetation,  which, 
perhaps,  derives  a  sufficiency  of  moisture  from  the  dews.  It  is  true,  that 
cjops  of  wheat,  corn,  and  the  like,  are  much  effected  by  the  drought, 
whenever  there  has  been  a  deficiency  of  rain,  during  the  previous  rainy 
season.  When  rains  fall  in  abundance  during  the  winter,  it  is  held  as  a 
sure  prelude,  and  in  fact,  an  assurance,  of  an  abundant  crop,  the  ensuing- 
summer  ;  but,  if  there  is  an  insufficiency  of  rain,  crops  are  Jess  abundant 
Seasons  which  are  preceded  by  a  rainy  season,  which  produces  a  defi- 
ciency of  rain,  are  called  dry  seasons.  These  are  said  to  occur,  generally, 
CEnce  in  four  or  five  years,  yet  latterly,  two  dry  seasons  have  occurred,  m 
succep.sion.  Althoiiah  the  crops  of  the  dry  seasons,  are  much  less  abi^Br. 
(tint  than  tiiose  of  the  ordtniry  seasons,  yet,  as  will  more  fully  appear, 
npon  a  subsequent  page,  the  crops  even  of  a  diT  season,  are  much  belter 
here,  tiian  they  are  at  any  time,  m  Oregon,  or  even  in  most  of  the  States. 
The  climate  of  the  Eastern  section  is  much  more  variable,  than  that  of 
the  Western  section,  and  is  subject  to  much  greater  excesses,  of  both  heat 
and  cold.  This  is  attributed  to  its  contiguity  to,  and  its  being  surrounded 
almost  entirely  by,  the  various  mountains,  many  of  which  are  covered 
with  perpetual  snows.  A  further  reason  is  found,  in  the  fact  of  its  being 
cut  off,  almost  entirely,  from  the  ■pacific  influence  of  the  ocean.  The 
mean  temperature  of  this  section,  is  about  58  deg.  Fahrenheit,  judging 
from  such  facts  as  I  was  able  to  collect,  upon  this  subject,  for  we  have  not 
the  same  data,  in  reftTence  to  the  climate  of  this  section.  Snow  some> 
times  falls  in  some  portions  of  thi.s  section,  especially  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  mountains,  but  it  very  seldom  lies,  more  than  two  or  three  days. 
Running  water  never  freezes,  only  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of  the 
mountains,  nor  does  standing  water  ever  freeze,  in  portions  remote  from 
tthe  mountains,  more  than  the  eighth  of  one  inch  in  thickness.  There  are 
numerous  valleys  in  this  section,  which  have  as  mild  winters,  as  do  any 
portions  of  the  Western  section.  Many  portions  are  also  found  here,  as  Iti 
the  Western  section,  where  snow,  frost,  and  ice,  have  never  been  knowo. 
These  facts  are  ascertained,  from  the  Indians  and  trappers,  who  inhabit 
those  regions.  This  section  is  also,  subject  to  the  influence  of  the  south- 
ern winds,  which  prevail  during  the  winter,  as  its  southern  extremity,  i« 
not  entirely  walled  in  by  mountains,  as  it  is  elsewhere,  but  it  is  much  le§s 
affected  by  either,  the  southern  or  northern  winds,  than  the  Western  sec- 
tion. The  excessive  heat,  which  would  otherwise  prevail  here,  is  vastly 
diminished,  by  the  strong  north  and  north  westerly  breezes,  which  pour 
in  the  cold  atmosphere  from  those  regions,  and  thereby  supplying  the 
vacuum,  which  is  created  by  the  heated  prairies  and  plains  below.  The 
snowy  mountains  also,  have  a  great  tendency  to  diminish  the  heat  of 
summer,  and  they  also,  vastly  increase  the  cold  of  the  winter.  The  rainy 
season  of  this  section,  is  not  unlike,  that  of  the  Western  section,  in  any 
other  respect,  than  perhaps,  that  of  its  being  of  longer  continuance.  Dui» 
ing  this  season,  however,  it  rains  much  more  frequently  here,  than  in  the 
Western  section.  It  is  true,  that  this  section  does  not  possess  as  mild  and 
uqiform  a  climate,  as  the  Western  section,  but  it  possesses  a  much  greater 


TO     OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  85 

variety  of  climates,  and  temperatures.  In  the  lower  valleys  is'summer,  ha 
(he  more  elevated  valleys  is  spring-;  upon  the  elevated  plains  and  prairies 
js  autumn ;  and  upon  the  mountains  is  winter.  There  are  many  portions 
iii  which,  at  any  season  of  the  year,  you  may  travel  in  one  day,  through 
every  degree  of  temperature,  from  120  deg.  to  minus  18  deg.  Fahren- 
heit. Here,  perpetual  summer,  is  in  the  midst  of  unceasing  winter  ;  pep- 
ennial  spring,  and  never  failing  autumn,  stand  side  by  side;  and  towering 
enow-clad  mountains  forever  look  down  upon  eternal  verdure. 

From  what  has  been  said,  in  reference  to  the  climate,  very  correct  con- 
cjusions  may  be  readily  drawn  in  reference  to  the  adaptation  of  this 
country,  to  the  promotion  of  health.  There  are  few  portions  of  the  world, 
if  any,  which  are  so  entirely  exempt  from  all  fehrifacient  causes.  There 
being  no  low,  marshy  regions,  the  noxious  miasmatic  effluvia,  so  common 
in  such  regions,  is  here,  nowhere  found.  The  purity  of  the  atmosphere, 
is  most  extraordinary,  and  almost  incredible.  So  pure  is  it,  in  fact,  that 
flesh  of  any  kind  may  be  hung  for  weeks  together,  in  the  open  air,  and 
that,  too,  in  the  summer  season,  whhout  undergoing  putrefaction.  The 
Gilifornians  prepare  their  meat  for  food,  as  a  general  thing,  in  this  man- 
ner; in  doing  which,  no  salt  is  required,  yet  it  is  sometimes  used,  as  a 
matter  of  preference.  The  best  evidence,  however,  that  can  be  adduced, 
in  reference  to  the  superior  health  of  this  country,  is  the  fact,  that  disease 
of  any  kind  is  very  seldom  known,  in  any  portion  of  the  country.  Cases 
of  fever,  of  any  kind,  have  seldom  been  known,  any  where  on  the  coast, 
but  bilious  intermittent  fevers,  prevail  to  a  very  small  extent,  in  some  poi- 
tions  of  the  interior,  yet  they  are  of  so  extremely  mild  a  type,  that  it  is 
very  seldom  found  necessary,  to  resort  to  medical  aid.  Persons  attacked 
with  these  fevers,  seldom  adopt  any  other  remedy,  than  that  of  abstaining 
a  short  time,  from  food,  or  going  to  the  coast.  The  latter  remedy  is  said 
to  be  infallible,  and  I  am  inclined  to  that  opinion,  from  the  flictthat  fevers 
are  so  seldom  known,  any  where  on  the  coast,  and  from  one  or  tw^o  cases, 
that  came  under  my  own  observ^ation.  The  extraordinary  health  upon 
the  coast,  is,  perhaps,  attributable,  in  a  great  measure,  to  the  effect  of  the 
exhilerating  and  refreshing  sea-breezes,  which,  at  all  times,  prevail  in 
that  vicinity.  All  foreigners,  with  whom  I  conversed,  upon  this  subject, 
and  who  reside  in  that  country,  are  unanimous  and  confident,  in  the  ex- 
pression of  the  belief,  that  it  is  one  of  the  most  healthy  portions  of  the 
world.  From  my  own  experience,  and  knowledge  of  the  country,  esp<»- 
dally,  of  its  entire  exemption,  from  all  the  ordinary  causes  of  disease,  and 
the  extraordinary  purity  of  its  atmosphere,  I  am  clearly  of  the  opinion, 
that  there  are  very  few  portions  of  the  world,  which  are  superior,  or  even 
equal  to  this,  in  point  of  healthfulness,  and  salubrity  of  climate.  While 
all  this  region,  especially  on  the  coast,  is  entirely  exempt,  from  all  febrifk 
causes,  it  is  also  entirely  free,  from  all  sudden  changes,  and  extreme  vari- 
ableness of  climate,  or  other  causes  of  catarrhal,  or  consumptive  affeo- 
tions;  hence,  I  cannot  but  think,  that  it  is  among  the  most  favorable  p#- 
sorts  in  the  known  world,  for  invalids. 

-^The  productions  will  next  engage  our  attention  ;  and  here,  such  facts 
'will  be  adduced,  as  will,  to  some  extent,  at  least,  sustain  the  view  taken 
Qpon  another  page,  in  reference  to  the  extraordinary  fertility  of  the  soil. 
,  The  productions  of  the  Western  section,  will  be  found  to  differ  very  ma- 
terially,  from  those  of  the  Eastern.  I  shall  first  notice  those  of  the  Wes- 
tern section,  at  some  length.     The  timber  of  this  section  is,  generally, 


86  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

confined  to  the  coast,  the  rivers  and  mountains  ;  but  there  are  many  por- 
tions of  the  different  valleys,  off  the  rivers,  which  are  well  supplied  with 
good  timber.  The  largest  and  most  valuable  timber  is  found,  upon  the 
coast,  where  dense  forests,  in  mnny  places,  are  found,  consisting  of  fie, 

{)ine,  cedar,  "  red  wood,"  (a  species  of  cedar,)  spruce,  oak,  ash  and  pop- 
ar.  Much  of  this  timber  grows  to  an  enormous  size,  especially,  the  ''  red 
wood,"  fir  and  pine,  which  are  frequently  seen  two  hundred,  and  even  two 
hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  height,  and  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  in  diametet. 
This  timber  makes  excellent  lumber,  but  its  vast  size,  renders  it  es- 
tremely  difficult,  either  to  chop  or  saw  it,  with  any  degree  of  facility. 
The  timber  in  the  interior,  both  on  the  rivers,  and  in  the  valleys  ren.otfi 
from  theriversjconsists  chiefly,  of  oak,  of  almost  every  Variety,  including 
red,  white  and  live  oak,  ash,  poplar,  cherry  and  willow.  It  consists 
chiefly,  however,  of  the  different  varieties  of  oak  and  ash.  The  timber 
of  the  mountains  consist  of  pine^  fir,  arbor  vitas,  cedar  and  ppruce.  Bs- 
sides  the  varieties  of  timber,  here  mentioned,  in  many  portions  of  the 
country,  there  is  a  dense  undergrowth  of  thorns,  hazels,  briers,  roses  and 
grape  vines,  both  upon  the  coast,  and  in  the  interior.  The  timber  of  the 
Eastern  section,  is  much  the  same,  as  that  of  the  Western  sectior..  Here, 
as  in  that  section,  it  is  chiefly,  confined  to  the  mountains  and  riveis,  but 
it  is,  generally,  of  a  much  smaller  growth,  than  the  same  species  found 
in  that  section.  It  consists,  principally,  of  pine,  fir,  spruce,  cedar,  ash, 
poplar,  cherry  and  willow.  The  oak,  ash,  cherry,  poplar,  and  willow, 
are  generally,  found  upon,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  the  streams,  while  the  fir, 
pine,  spruce  and  cedar,  are  found,  mostly,  upon,  and  in  the  neighborhood 
of  the  rnountiiin?;,  and  the  more  elevated  regions.  The  undergrowth  of 
ihis  section,  also,  consists,  principally,  of  hazels,  thorns,  briers  and  grape 
vines.  As  before  remarked,  there  are  some  portions  of  this  section  which 
produce  scarcely  any  vegelatioiL  besid(  s  the  wormwood,  or  properly,  ar- 
timesia,  and  the  prickly  pear.  It  is  frequently  asserted  that  there  is  a  very 
great  deficiency  of  timber  in  this  country,  but  such  truly  is  not  the  case; 
there  is  ample  timber,  in  both  sections,  and  in  all  the  various  portions  of 
each,  for  all  useful  purposes.  It  is  true  that  there  is  not  the  same  quan- 
tities of  timber  here,  as  are  found  in  some  portions  of  Oregon,  or  in  some 
parts  of  the  States,  yet,  the  same  quantity  is  not  required,  in  a  climate  of 
such  extraordinary  mildness  and  uniformity. 

Both  the  climate  and  the  soil, are,eminently, adapted  to  the  growing  of 
wheat,  rye,  oats,  barley,  beans  and  peas,  hemp,  flax,  tobacco,  cotton,  rice, 
coffee,  corn  and  cane,  as  well  as  all  kinds  of  vegetables,  and  especially, 
such  as  potatoes,  turnips,  beets,  carrots,  onions  and  the  like.  And  both 
the  soil  and  climate  are  no  less  adapted  to  the  growing  of  the  greatest  va- 
riety of  fruits;  among  which  are  apples,  pears,  peaches,  plums,  cherries 
and  grapes,  as  well  as  most  of  the  tropical  fruits,  particularly  such  as 
oranges,  lemons,  citrons,  dates,  figs  and  pomegranates.  It  is  rather  su^ 
prising,  that  almost  all  of  the  tropical  and  northern  grains  and  fruits, 
should  be-  produced  here,  in  conjunction,  in  the  same  latitude  ;  but  it  istio 
more  surprising,  than  it  is  to  find  a  southern  climate,  in  a  northern  latitude, 
as  is  the  case,  everywhere  upon  the  Pacific  coast,  and  which  is  clearly  ah 
tributable  to  the  causes  stated  upon  a  previous  page.  There  are  other 
mediate  causes  which  might  be  assigned,  but  the  above  is,  manifestly,  the 
proximate  cause ;  yet,  accounting  for  a  northern  lathude's  possessing  a 
southern  climate,  is,  after  all,  much  like  accounting  for  a  northern  man's 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA,  8t 

possessing  southern  principle?;  many  circumstances,  in  either  case,  must  be 
taken  into  the  account.  Without  attempting-  to  assign  any  further  reasons, 
"however,  I  will  proceed;  for,  perhaps,  it  is  sufficient  for  the  present  pur- 
pose, to  show  that  such  is  the  fact,  for  which  each  can  account,  at  his  lei- 
sure, and  in  his  own  way.  Many  kinds  of  the  grains  and  fruits  above 
enumerated,  are  indigenous  for  instance,  the  oats,  wheat,  rye;  many  of 
the  tropical  fruits,  and  a  great  variety  of  grapes;  flax,  a  kind  of  hemp, 
and  red  and  white  clover,  are  also  indigenous  productions,  The  oats  here 
alluded  to,  have  precisely  the  external  appearance  of  our  common  oats; 
but,  upon  examination,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  grain  differs  slightly  from 
that  of  ours.  It  is  rather  smaller,  and  is  covered  with  a  kind  of  furzy  in- 
tegument; otherwise,  it  is  precisely  similar  to  that  of  our  common  oats. 
They,^generally,  grow  much  higher  than  ours,and  the  stalk  is  much  larger, 
but  this  is  attributable  to  the  superior  fertility  of  the  soil,  and  the  greater 
generative  influence  of  the  climate,  and  not  to  the  difference  of  the  spe- 
cies. Their  usual  height  is  about  two  or  three  feet,  and  the  stalk  is,  conir 
jnonly,  about  the  size  of  that  of  our  ordinary  oats;  but  they  are  frequently 
found,  even  eight  feet  high,  having  a  stalk  half  an  inch  in  diameter.  Sever- 
al of  the  farmers  here,  informed  me,  that  they  had  often  seen  many  thousands 
of  acres  in  a  body,  which  were  higher  than  they  could  reach,  when  on 
horseback.  They  only  grow,  to  this  enormous  height,  during  those 
seasons,  which  have  been  preceeded  by  the  falling  of  an  abundance  of 
rain,  during  the  rainy  season.  The  season,  which  1  spent  in  this  region, 
was  a  dry  season,  that  is,  comparatively  little  rain  full  during  the  previ- 
ous rainy  season ;  but,  upon  several  occasions,  I  measured  the  stalks  of 
oats,  which  were  six  feet  long,  and  nearly  half  of  an  inch  in  diameter. 
In  traveling  through  the  various  sections  of  the  country,  I  have  passed 
through  thousands  of  acres,  which  were  from  two  to  five  feet  in  height, 
and  as  dense  as  they  could  possibly  stand :  when,  at  the  same  time,  I  al- 
most hourly  saw  the  old  sialics,  of  years  previous,  which  were  seven  or 
eight  feet  in  length,  and  sufficiently  large  and  strong,  for  walking  sticks. 
It  is  not  uncommon,  either  in  a  dry  or  wet  season,  to  see  continuous  plains 
and  valleys,  of  thousands  of  acres  in  extent,  which  are  thickly,  and  al- 
most entirely  clad,  with  oats  of  two  or  three  feet  in  height,  which  would 
produce  much  more  abundant  crops,  than  our  cultivated  oats.  In  many 
portions  of  the  country,  in  the  interior,  the  Indians  subsist  almost  wholly 
upon  them,  and  in  other  portions,  if  a  farmer  wishes  to  grow  a  crop  of 
oats,  he  has  nothing  to  do,  but  to  designate  a  certain  tract  as  his  oat  field, 
and  either  fence  it,  or  employ  a  few  Indians,  to  prevent  the  herds  from 
grazing  upon  it;  which  being  done,  in  May  or  June,  he  reaps  a  much 
larger  crop,  than  we  are  able  to  do,  in  any  of  the  States,  with  all  the  labor 
axid  expense  of  cultivation. 

The  clover,  of  which  I  speak,  is  in  all  respects,  like  our  ordinary  red, 
aiid  white  clover,  grown  in  the  different  States,  with  the  exception  of  its 
growing  much  larger.  Its  usual  height  is  about  two  or  three  feet,  but 
vast  bodies  of  it,  are  frequently  found,  four  or  five  feet  in  height,  and  as 
dense  as  it  can  possibly  grow.  It  is  chiefly  confined  to  the  valleys,  con- 
tiguous to  the  rivers,  but  it  is  also,  sometimes  found,  in  large  bodies,  in 
many  of  the  plains,  and  upon  the  hills.  All  of  the  bottoms  and  valleys, 
as  well  as  many  of  the  plains  and  hills,  abound  with  this  clover,  which, 
when  matured,  affords  a  most  excellent  natural  hay,  of  which,  all  kinds 
of  stock,  are  extremely  fond.     The  flax  found  among  the  spontaneous 


88  THE   EMIGRANTS'   GUIDE 

productions,  is  in  all  respects,  like  that  grown  in  the  States.  Its  general 
height  is  two  or  three  feet,  though  it  is  frequently  found  much  larger* 
Unlike  the  oats  and  clover,  it  is  chiefly  confined,  to  the  northern  portion 
of  the  country,  and  is  seldom  found  in  larger  tracts  than  five  or  six  hun- 
dred acres  in  a  body,  but  wherever  it  is  found,  it  grows  very  densely  and 
luxuriantly,  even  more  so  than  that  grown  in  the  east.  The  fibres  ap« 
pear  to  be  equally  as  strong,  as  those  of  the  ordinary  flax,  and  it  is,  iti 
truth,  the  same  species.  It  is  used  by  the  Indians,  to  a  very  large  extent, 
for  the  purpose  of  making  seines  and  ropes,  to  which  purposes  it  is  found 
to  be  admirably  suited.  The  hemp  here  found,  does  not  resemble  ours, 
nor  is  it  properly  hemp,  although  so  called ;  it  is  properly  a  species  of  thj? 
spurge,  commonly  called  milk-weed,  but  there  called  hemp.  Like  th® 
spurge,  it  emits  a  milky  juice  when  wounded  ;  grows  about  three  feet 
high,  and  has  a  tough  fibrous  bark,  which  is  used  by  the  -Mexicans  and 
Indians,  in  large  quantities,  for  making  ropes,  seines,  and  for  various  oth- 
er purposes.  Comparatively,  it  grows  in  very  small  quantities,  as  you 
very  seldom  see  more  than  fifty,  or  a  hundred  acres  of  it  together.  Wheat 
and  rye  are  also,  said  to  be,  indigenous  growths,  but  I  am  not  of  that 
opinion,  although  I  have  seen  wheat,  rye,  oats,  clover  and  flax,  all  grow- 
ing together,  more  than  three  hundred  miles,  from  any  settlement.  But 
upon  a  close  observance,  I  perceived,  that  the  wheat  and  rye,  were  found 
only,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  encampments,  of  the  traders  and  traj)- 
pers,  who  have,  for  years,  traversed  that  country.  Upon  inquiring  of 
tliose,  who  have  resided  in  that  country,  for  many  years,  I  ascertained* 
that  the  traders  and  trappers,  in  passing  through  the  interior,  frequently 
take  both  wheat  and  rye  with  them,  as  food  for  themselves  and  their  hop* 
ses.  These  facts,  were  fully  convincing,  to  my  mind,  that  the  wheat  and 
rye  had  been  introduced,  into  the  interior,  in  that  manner.  Other  pel?* 
sons  informed  me,  that  they  had,  very  frequently  seen,  both  wheat  and 
rye,  far  in  the  interior,  and  in  portions  of  the  country  never  visited  by  tlie 
traders  and  trappers,  but  still,  I  am  of  the  opinion,  that  if  not  introduced 
in  the  above  manner,  they  must  have  been  introduced  by  the  Indians,  or 
fowls,  and  hence,  that  although  they  are  spontaneous,  yet,  they  are  not  indi^ 
genous  productions.  The  various  grasses  found  here,  are  much  like  those 
found  in  Oregon,  and  in  many  of  the  States.  That  common  to  the  low- 
er valleys  and  bottoms,  is  much  larger  and  coarser,  than  that  which  grows 
upon  the  more  elevated  valleys,  plains  and  hills.  The  former,  usually 
grows,  about  two  or  three  feet  high,  while  the  latter  grows,  but  about  six 
inches  or  a  foot  high.  The  short  grass  is  much  the  finest  and  sweetest, 
and  is  always  sought  after,  in  preference  by  all  herbivorous  animals.  BotB 
kinds  here  alluded  to,  form  a  very  excellent  quality  of  natural  hay,  during 
the  summer,  of  which,  the  herds  are  very  fond,  and  which,  is  sought  by 
many  grazing  animals,  in  preference  to  the  green  herbage,  which  is  found 
at  every  season  of  the  year.  Thus,  it  is  seen,  that  the  various  grasses, 
the  oats  and  clover,  all  of  which,  are  undigenous  productions,  not  only 
afford  inexhausted  pasturage,  during  the  growing  season,  but  also,  inej^ 
baustible  provender,  during  all  the  residue  of  the  year. 

Thus  far,  I  have  only  spoken  of  the  indigenous  productions,  those 
which  are  produced  by  tillage,  will  next  be  considered.  The  wheat  wiU 
receive  our  first,  and  most  particular  attention ,  as  it  is  the  principal  grain 
grown  in  this  country,  as  yet,  and  as  it  will  undoubtedly,  always  consth- 
tute  one  of  the  principal  staples  of  the  country.     There  are  several  kin^s 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  89 

of  wheat  grown  here,  among  which,  are  all  the  common  varieties,  grown 
Ui  the  States,  as  well  as  several  varieties,  which  are  unknown  in  th« 
States.  The  wheat  most  commonly  grown,  however,  is  that  which  is 
called  the  wheat  of  Taos,  which  grows  here,  about  three  or  four  feel 
high,  and  bears  seven  distinct  heads  or  ears,  each  of  which,  is  equally  as 
large,  as  those  of  the  common  variety.  One  head  is  situated  upon  the 
stalk,  precisely  as  that  of  the  ordinary  wheat,  and  upon  each  side  of  this 
head,  there  are  three  others,  putting  out  from  the  main  stock,  about  three 
fourths  of  an  inch,  below  each  other.  The  berry  is  equally  as  large,  a» 
tliat  of  the  ordinary  kind,  and  it  is  said  to  weigh,  about  four  pounds  to 
the  bushel  heavier.  This  wheat  produces  very  abundantly,  as  also,  djo 
the  various  other  kinds,  as  far  as  they  have  been  tried.  The  average 
crop  is  from  thirty  to  forty  bushels  to  the  acre,  or  to  one  of  sowing;  but  an 
average  crop  of  Ufty,  sixty,  and  even  seventy  bushels,  to  the  acre,  is  fre- 
quently received.  Several  very  respectable  and  credible  geiUlenien,  in- 
formed me,  tliat  there  had  been  an  instance,  within  their  own  knowledge, 
oi  a  farmer's  having  received  one  hundred  and  twenty  bushels  to  the  acre  ; 
and  that,  the  next  year  ,  from  a  spontaneous  growth,  upon  the  same 
gi'ound,  he  received  sixty-one  bushels,  to  the  acre.  To  many  it  will  ap- 
pear impossible,  that  one  acre  of  ground,  sliould  produce  that  quantity  of 
wheat,  and  hence,  to  them,  the  above  statement  will  appear  incredible ; 
hut  I  have  not  llie  least  doubt,  of  its  entire  correctness.  This  is  no  more 
extraordinary,  than  it  would  be  to  see  oats  growing  spontaneously,  four, 
or  even  five  or  six  feet  high,  over  thousands  of  acres  ;  nor  is  it  farther  re- 
moved from  the  common  order  of  things,  than  it  would  be  to  see  sponta- 
neous growths  of  flax  and  clover,  of  three  or  four  feet  in  height,  covering 
vast  plains  and  valleys,  as  far  as  vision  extends,  yet  these  things  arc  true. 
Wheat  is  generally  sov/n,  from  the  first  of  November,  to  the  first  of 
March,  and  is  iiarvested  in  May  or  June,  depending  upon  the  time  of  its 
being  sown,  which  is  usually  deferred,  until  the  commencement  of  the 
raiiny  season.  This  course  is  pursued,  because  of  the  greater  ease  with 
which  the  lands  are  ploughed,  after  the  falling  of  the  rains.  Rye,  barley, 
file  cultivated  oats,  hemp  and  flax,  have  not,  as  yet,  been  tried,  but  they 
will  all,  undoubtedly,  produce  extremely  well,  judging  from  what  ha« 
been  previously  said,  in  reference  to  their  spontaneous  productions.  Cori; 
is  not  grown  to  much  extent,  but  wherever  it  is  grown,  it  yields  extreme- 
ly well,  giving  an  average  crop,  of  about  fifty  or  sixty  bushels  to  the  acre. 
It  is  proper,  liowever,  here  to  remark,  that  the  corn  grown  here,  at  this 
time,  is  what  is  called  the  Spanish  corn,  which  is  a  much  smaller  kind, 
flian  our  common  Indian  corn,  and  produces  much  less  abundandy;  and 
that,  after  it  is  planted,  no  further  attention  is  paid  to  it,  until  it  is  matured, 
'^ith  ordinary  cultivation,  even  this  kind  would,  undoubtedly,  give  a 
much  more  plentiful  return.  It  is  commonly  planted,  in  February  and 
March,  and  is  harvested,  any  time  after  the  last  of  June,  by  which  time, 
ft  always  matures.  The  climate  and  the  soil  are  both,  peculiarly  adapted, 
to  the  growing  of  tobacco,  cotton,  rice  and  cane.  Tobacco  has  already 
been  tested,  with  eminent  success ;  it  is  said  to  grow  with  as  much  lux- 
Hriance,  and  to  yield  as  plentifully,  as  it  does  in  Cuba ;  and  the  quality  is 
tjiought  not  to  be  inferior,  to  that  grown  in  Cuba,  or  elsewhere.  Rice, 
cotton  and  cane,  have  not,  as  yet,  been  tested,  but  the  probability  is,  that 
they  will  succeed  admirably.  It  is  said,  by  some,  that  cotton,  can  not 
11 


90  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

be  grown,  even  with  ordinary  success,  where  there  is  no  rain  during  the 
summer  ;  hut  experience  controverts  this  view ;  for  it  is  grown  with  emi- 
nent success,  in  other  portions  of  Mexico,  which  have  a  similar  climate> 
And  which  have  not  a  drop  of  rain,  during  the  entire  summer.  All  kinds 
of  garden  vegetables,  are  grown  here,  with  extraordinary  success,  many 
kinds  of  which,  are  planted  and  gathered,  at  any,  and  every  season  of  the 
year.  Melons  of  all  kinds,  produce  extremely  well,  in  all  portions  of 
this  section,  much  better,  in  fact,  than  they  do  in  any  portion  of  the  States. 

The  various  fruits  which  are  here  produced,  have  been  enumerated 
npon  a  former  page,  including  both  those  which  are  indigenous,  and  those 
which  are  cultivated,  as  well  as  all  of  the  northern  and  the  tropical  fruits. 
The  latter  are  chiefly,  confined  to  the  southern  portions  of  this  section, 
while  the  northern  fruits  abound,  in  all  the  different  portions,  both  in  the 
north  and  the  south.  The  same  variety,  of  the  ordinary  cultivated  fruits, 
of  the  north,  is  not  found  here,  as  exists  in  many  of  the  states,  but  several 
varieties  have  been  introduced,  and  they  have  been  found  to  yield  most  plen- 
tifully. Even  in  the  most  northern  part,  of  this  section,  the  peach  trees,  and 
various  other  fruit  trees,  bloom  in  January  and  February,  and  in  the  south- 
ern part,  as  early  as  December.  The  cultivated  grape  grows  most  luxuriant- 
ly, and  produces  very  abundantly ;  and  when  ripe,  it  is  among  the  most  de- 
licious and  grateful  fruits,  that  ever  grace  the  festival  board.  There  are  many 
vineyards  here,  of  ten  or  fifteen  acres  in  extent,  where  the  grape  is  grown 
in  large  quantities  ;  and  prepared  and  preserved,  in  all  the  various  man- 
ners, know  elsewhere.  At  these  vineyards,  raisins  are  made  in  suflScient 
quantities,  for  home  consumption,  and  may,  undoubtedly,  be  made  in  largs 
quantities,  for  exportation.  They  are,  usually,  prepared,  either  by  par- 
tially cutting  the  stalks,  of  the  branches,  before  the  grapes  are  entirely 
ripe,  and  allowing  them  to  remain  upon  the  vine,  until  they  are  perfectly 
dried  ;  or  by  gathering  them,  in  their  matured  state,  and  steeping  them, 
for  a  short  time,  in  an  alkaline  lye,  previous  to  their  being  dried.  Thoss 
which  are  cured  by  the  first  method,  are  the  most  delicious,  and  are  much 
preferred ;  and  they  are,  prehaps,  not  inferior  to  the  Malaga  raisins,  which 
are  imported  from  Spain.  Besides  the  delicious  fruits,  which  they  afford 
for  the  table,  they  also  afford  a  most  generous  wine,  which  always  consti- 
tutes, one  of  the  grand  essentials  of  a  California  dinner.  Here  I  must 
confess,  that  my  temperance  pledge,  although  formerly  including  all  al?- 
coholic,  intoxicating  and  vinous  liquors,  did  not  extend  to  the  latter,  in 
California ;  and  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  old  father  Mathew  himself, 
however  far  he  might  be  from  doing  so  in  the  north,  would  drink  wine  in 
California  ;  I  know  old  Bacchus  would. 

A  great  variety  of  wild  fruits,  also  abound,  in  all  the  different  portions, 
of  this  section,  among  which,  are  crab-apples,  thorn-apples,  plums,  grapes, 
strawberries,  cranberries,  whortleberries,  and  a  variety  of  cherries.  The 
strawberries  are  extremely  abundant,  and  they  are  the  largest,  and  most 
delicious,  that  I  have  ever  seen ;  much  larger,  than  the  largest,  which  we 
Bee  in  the  various  States.  They  bloom  in  January,  and  ripen  in  March, 
when  they  are  gathered  and  dried,  in  large  quantities,  by  the  settlers  and 
the  Indians.  The  grapes  are  also  unusually  plentiful,  especially,  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  rivers,  creeks  and  lakes,  where  the  greatest  variety  fa» 
found.  They  are  gathered  in  great  quantities,  by  the  various  tribes  of 
Indians,  not  only  for  their  own  consumption,  but  for  that  of  the  white 
sgltlers.     I  have  not  unfrequently  seen  the  Indians,  arrive  at  Capt.  S«4- 


TO  ORKOON  AND  CALIFORNIA  91 

tier's  fort,  with  thirty  or  forty  bushels  at  a  time,  which  beings  measured, 
the  Capt.  would  pay  them,  some  trivial  compensation,  when  they  would 
depart  for  their  villages,  with  the  view  of  returning  the  next,  and  every 
succeeding  day,  while  the  grapes  were  to  be  obtained.  The  grapes  thua 
(Jbtained  by  the  Capt.  were  designed  either  for  the  table  sauce,  or  distilla- 
tion. The  mast  of  this  section,  is  also  extremely  plentiful,  in  all  the  dif- 
ferent valleys,  and  other  timbered  lands,  especially  the  acorns,  which  I 
have  observed  here,  in  much  greater  abundance,  than  I  have  ever  seen 
them  elsewhere.  All  the  common  varieties,  found  in  the  States,  are  also 
found  here,  and  in  quantities  sufficient  for  all  the  swine,  and  all  the  other 
animals,  which  subsist  upon  mast,  as  well  as  the  various  tribes  of  Indians, 
many  of  whom,  subsist  almost  entirely  upon  them,  the  greater  part  of 
the  year.  Large,  spreading,  white  oaks,  are  often  seen,  which  produce 
thirty  or  forty  bushels,  to  the  tree ;  under  many  of  which,  the  ground  is 
literally  covered  with  them,  several  inches  in  thickness. 

The  ,grain  and  fruits,  of  the  [Eastern  section,  differ  somewhat,  from 
diose  of  the  Western  section,  which  is  attributable,  to  the  great  difference 
of  soil  and  climate.  Many  of  the  spontaneous  productions  are,  however, 
the  same,  in  many  portions  of  this  section,  for  instance,  the  oats,  clover, 
flax  and  hemp,  many  of  the  wild  fruits,  and  various  grapes,  all  of  which, 
grow  here  also,  with  the  greatest  luxuriance,  and  in  the  largest  quantities. 
The  cultivated  productions  will,  from  the  peculiarity  of  the  soil,  and  cli- 
mate be  confined  to  wheat,  rye,  oats,  flax,  hemp,  tobacco,  corn,  rice, 
beans,  peas,  the  various  vegetables,  apples,  pears,  peaches,  plums,  grapes 
and  cherries.  Cotton  and  corn,  can  not,  perhaps,  be  grown  with  any 
degree  of  success,  in  any  portion  of  this  section,  nor  can  many,  if  any,  of 
the  tropical  fruits.  Nothing  can  be  said  with  certainty,  in  relation  to  the 
yield  of  the  various  cultivated  grains  and  fruits,  which  may  be  produced 
in  this  section,  as  all  agricultural  experiments,  have,  thus  far, been  con- 
fined, entirely  to  the  Western  section;  but  judging  from  the  peculiar 
adaptation,  of  the  soil  and  climate,  to  their  production,  there  is  no  doubt, 
but  that,  many  of  the  various  productions,  above  enumerated,  may  be  pro- 
duced here,  with  the  same  cultivation,  equally  as  abundantly,  as  they  can 
be  in  the  Western  section.  This  view  is  strengthened,  when  we  reflect, 
that  all  the  various  indigenous"  grains  and  fruits,  grow  equally  as  luxuri- 
antly, and  produce,  with  equal  profusions,  here,  as  in  that  section. 


93  THE   EMIGRANTS'    GUIDE 


CHAPTER  X. 

Slock;  innumerable  herds  of.  Horses;  vast  herds  of;  size  of;  durahiULy  of; 
variety  of  colors  of;  method,  of  catching;  great  destruction  of  Cattlef 
countless  numbers  of;  superiorily  of;  ferocity  of;  method  of  taking;  meth- 
od of  bra nding.  JJestiiict ive  prodigality  of  ]\fea^'ca ns.  C 'altle  and  horses 
driven  to  Oregon.  Sheep;  large  numbers  of;  dzeof;  quality  of  Foilr- 
ho-med  sheep.  Young  produced  ticice  annually.  Sheep  driven  to  Oregorb. 
Hogs;  aversion  of  Mexicans  to;  pecidiar  adaptation  to  the  reanng  of. 
Herdsmen.  Adaptation  of  Eastei^i  section.,  to  grazing  purposes.  Game 
of  Western  section.;  variety  of  Elk;  numbers  of .  A  California  hunter. 
Elk  valuable  for  their  beef;  wilhirhat  facility  killed;  largest  on  the  west 
aide  of  the  mourdains;  easy  of  domestication.  Antelope;  great  numbers 
of;  peculiarities  of;  method  of  killing.  Deer;  varieties  of;  compajative 
numbers  of  Bear;  dijferent  kinds  of;  numbers  of;  size  of;  rapacious- 
ness  of;  li/no  taken  ;  for  what  fmrpose  taken.  Black  and,  grizzly  bear.^ 
less  numeroits.  Wolves;  different  kinds  of ;  great  numbers  of;  trouble^ 
some  to  settlers.  Fur-bearing  animals  ;  abundance  of;  proper  regard  to 
their  preservation.  Game  of  ilie  Eastern  section;  sim.ilar  to  that  of  th4 
Western  section.  Feathered  animals;  variety  of;  numbers  of.  Fish; 
variety  of;  abundance  of;  size  of;  quality  of ;  how  taken;  how  cured.. 
Shellfish;  abundance  of;  quality  of.  Whales;  numbers  of  Fish  of 
Eastern  section.  Fisheries;  numbers  of;  inexhausiibleness  of ;  not  surpas- 
sed by  those  of  Newfoundland. 

Stock  of  all  kinds,  succeed  most  admirably,  in  all  portions  of  the 
Western  section,  which,  however,  would  be  inferred,  from  what  has  been 
previously  adduced.  Immense  herds,  of  all  the  various  domestic  animals, 
are  reared,  with  little,  or  no  expense.  They  require  neither  feeding  nor 
housing,  and  are  always  sufficiently  fattened,  for  the  slaughter-house. 
Instead  of  becoming  lean  and  meager,  during  the  winter,  as  our  herds  do, 
they  are  always  much  the  fattest,  and  in  the  best  condition,  during  that 
season.  Horses  are  here  found,  in  herds  almost  innumerable,  and  they 
are  always  in  the  best  condition,  for  active  and  laborious  service.  Al- 
though they  are  rather  smaller  than  ours,  they  are  much  more  hardy  and 
fleet,  and  equally  as  well,  if  not  better  proportioned.  They  endure 
fatigue  much  better, than  any  horses  with  which  I  am  acquainted;  it  is 
not  uncommon  to  ride  or  drive  them,  for  several  days  in  succession,  withr 
out  either  food  or  rest.  It  is  the  practice  of  the  Mexicans  to  tie  them  up, 
without  food  or  water,  for  several  days  previous  to  using  them;  this 
eourse,  however,  is  only  pursued,  when  some  extraordinary  feat  is  to  be 
performed;  as  that  of  riding  the  same  horse  a  hundred  miles  in  tei> 
nours,  which  is  not  unfrequcntly  done.  For  a  Mexican  to  ride  a  hundred 
miles  in  one  day,  is  not  uncommon,  nor  docs  it  appear  to  require  any  ex- 
traordinary effort.  One  hundred  miles  a  day,  are  as  frequently  driven 
by  the  Mexicans  as  fifty  are  by  our  people,  in  truth,  with  them,  it  is  but 
an  ordinary  day's  ride,  which,  however,  is  generally  performed  with  twb 
or  three  horses,  which  are  alternately  ridden,  as  circumstances  requir©^ 
The  usual  gait  at  which  those  horses  are  driven,  is  a  fast  gallop,  at  which 
gait  they  are  frequently  kept,  for  many  hours  in  succession,  with  very 
slight  intervals  of  rest,  of  five  or  ten  minutes,  and  that  too,  without  food: 
I  have  frequently  ridden  those  horses,  over  the  plains  of  California,  upon 
a  fast  gallop,  for  five  or  six  consecutive  hours,  without  the  least  interoaxe- 


TO    OREGON   AND    CALIFORNIA.  SB 

sioti.  This  will  enable  the  reader  to  arrive  at  a  tolerably  correct  conclo?- 
gion,  in  reference  to  the  hardiness,  and  durability  of  the  California  horses, 
which,  although  they  are  rather  smaller,  are,  I  think,  in  many  respucts, 
superior  to  our  own.  They  are,  generally,  better  formed,  and  much 
more  fleet,  than  our  comnion  horses.  Among-  them,  you  will  see 
every  variety  of  color,  imaginable,  from  a  jet  black,  to  a  snow  white. 
All  the  varieties  of  colors  found  among  our  horses,  are  found  among 
them,  besides  many  varieties  which  are  never  found  among  oura. 
Many  are  roan,  with  the  exception  of  their  manes,  tails  and  (;ars,  which 
are  black,  brown  or  bay;  others  are  white,  with  the  exception  of  their 
njanes,  tails  and  ears,  which  are  cream-colored,  tipped  with  bay  or  black; 
emd  others  are  lead,  copper  or  cream  colored,  with  bay,  black  or  brown  ears, 
manes  and  tails.  Perhaps  the  description  given  of  Jacob's  cattle,  would 
be  as  expressive  of  the  variety  of  colors,  of  the  California  horsts,  as  any 
fliat  can  well  be  given.  They  are  mijch  better  trained  for  the  saddle,  tlian 
ours,  and  generally,  much  better  gaited,  and  more  gentle  and  kindly  dis^ 
posed  when  broken. 

The  different  farmers  always  keep  a  number  of  herdsmen,  whose  busi- 
aess  it  is  to  drive  the  horses,  from  place  to  place,  as  it  becomes  necessary, 
10  seek  additional  pasturage,  and  who  are,  usually,  Indians  or  Mex- 
icans of  the  lowest  grade.  One  of  thtse  herdsmen,  wishing  to  catch 
any  horse  which  he  may  desire,  mounts  on^  of  his  most  fleet  horses, 
which  he  always  keeps  under  the  saddle,  for  that  purpose,  and  rushes 
into  a  band  with  a  '-lasso,"  which,  when  he  has  approached  within  twenty 
or  thirty  yards,  of  the  dcsisjnated  steed,  he  throws,  with  surprising  accu- 
racy, around  his  neck,  and  thus  he  is  noosed  and  secured.  They  are 
either  taken  in  the  above  manner,  or  they  are  driven  into  a  "caral,'* 
where  they  are  taken,  in  the  manner  just  described.  The  ''lasso,"  is  a 
very  sirong  rope,  usually  made  of  raw  hide,  and  is  about  sixty  feet  in 
length,  atone  end  of  which,  there  is  a  noose,  which  is  thrown  upon  the 
neck  of  the  horse,  as  before  stated,  while  the  other  end,  is  firmly  attached, 
to  the  pommel  of  the  saddle.  As  soon  as  the  "lasso'""  is  thus  thrown  upon 
fhe  neck  of  the  horse,  designed  to  be  taken,  the  saddle  horse,  being  pro- 
perly trained,  immediately  braces  firmly,  in  order  to  guard  against  the 
frightful  efforts,  of  the  plunging  and  snorting  steed;  and  from  the  decided 
advantage,  which  he  has,  in  pulling  by  the  girth  of  the  saddle,  wliile  the 
other  pulls  by  his  neck  only,  he  invariably  succeeds  in  resisting  every 
effort,  of  the  wildest  and  most  powerful.  These  horses  are  but  slightly 
smaller  than  ours,  which  may,  perhaps,  be  attributed  to  the  entire  inatten- 
tion, to  their  rearing,  which  may  be  seen  from  the  following  facts. 
Many  of  the  farmers  have  as  many  as  fifteen  or  twenty  thousand  head, 
which  are  all  permitted  to  range  together,  with  very  little  notice  or  atten- 
tion, other  than  that  of  branding  them  when  young.  So  numerous  are 
ihey,  that  they  have  frequently  been  killed  by  thousands,  in  order  to  pre- 
sei've  the  vegetation  for  the  cattle,  which  are  considered  much  the  most 
valuable.  Instead  of  this  inhuman  and  destructive  practice,  how  easily 
could  those  indolent  beings,  drive  their  horses  into  the  interior,  which  ex- 
tends almost  a  terra  incognita^  and  which  everywhere,  abounds  with 
fpontaneous  and  inexhaustible  vegetation?  By  this  course,  they  would 
Qot  only  preserve  and  increase  their  stock,  but  they  would  also  preserve 
a  character,  for  propriety  and  humanity ;  but  inherent  indolence  forbid* 
l««y  course  which  requires  any  active  exertion.     A  Mexican  always  par 


94  THE  EMIGRANTS*  OtTIDB 

goes  that  method  of  doing  things,  which  requires  the  least  physical  or 
mental  exorcise,  unless  it  involves  some  danger,  in  which  case,  he  always 
adopts  some  other  method. 

The  cattle  are  much  more  numerous  than  the  horses ;  herds  of  count- 
less  numbers  are  everywhere  seen,  upon  all  the  different  valleys  and 
plains,  throughout  this  entire  section.     It  is  said  that  many  of  the  farmei? 
have,  from  twenty  to  thirty  thousand  head.     In  whatever  district  yon 
travel,  you  see  many  thousands  of  large  fine  cattle,  which,  in  herds  innu- 
merable, are  traversing  those  unbounded  plains,  of  oats,  clover  and  flax, 
of  unparalleled  growth.     These  cattle  are  undoubtedly  superior  to  ours, 
especially  for  the  yoke,  as  they  are  much  larger,  and  they  are  equally  as 
valuable  for  their  milk,  and  much  more  valuable  for  their  beef,  which  is 
always  much  fatter  and  more  tender,  than  that  of  our  cattle.    When  domes- 
ticated, they  are  equally  as  gentle  and  as  tractable  as  ours,  but  before  they 
are  domesticated,  they  are  as  wild,  as  the  deer  or  elk.     Each  farmer  how- 
ever, usually  has  as  many  of  both  oxen  and  cows,  as  are  required  upon  his 
farm,  ^hich  are  fully  domesticated,  but  as  a  general  thing,  they  are  not  only 
as  wild  as  the  deer  and  elk,  but  they  are  as  ferocious  as  tigers.    Such  is  their 
ferocity,  that  it  is  extremely  unsafe,  to  venture  among  them,  otherwise  than 
on  horseback,  in  which  manner,  persons  not  only  go  among  them,  with  per- 
fect safety,  but  a  few  persons  may  thus  drive  and  herd  them,  with  the  same 
ifecility,  that  they  could  our  cattle.   Should  a  person  venture  among  them  on 
foot,  when  they  are  collected  in  large  herds,  he  would  be  instantly  attacked 
and  slain,  unless  he  should  find  refuge,  in  some  position  which  would 
prove  inaccessible  by  them.     As  a  general  thing,  the  farmers  herd  them 
regularly,  and  occasionally  drive  them  into  a  "caral,"  or  inclosure,  when 
their  timidity  is  so  increased,  and  their  ferocity  is  so  diminished,  that  they 
are  caught  and  branded,  with  much  facility.    They  are  taken,  when  driven 
into  these  "carals,"  m  a  manner,  similar  to  that  in  which,  the  horses  are 
taken,  as  before  described,  but  with  a  slight  difference,  which  I  will  here 
notice.     The  "lasso,"  instead  of  being  thrown  upon  their  necks,  is  thrown 
upon  their  hindmost  legs,  when  the  other  end  of  the  "lasso,"  being  firmly 
attached  to  the  pommel  of  the  saddle,  the  rider  plies  the  spur,  to  his  horse, 
and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  the  captured  bullock,  is  prostrated  upon 
the  ground,  plunging  and  leaping,  with  desperate  effort,  to  acquire  an 
upright  position,  but  all  to  no  purpose.     Now  the  red-hot  iron  is  applied, 
as  the  owner  directs,  giving  such  impress  as  he  may  have  selected  as  his 
brand,  when  the  "lasso,''  is  detached  from  his  legs,  by  an  Indian,  who  is 
very  cautious  to  secure  a  safe  retreat,  before  the  infuriated  animal,  again 
obtains  footing.     There  are  stated  times,  at  which  the  different  farmers, 
tlius  collect  their  cattle,  for  the  purpose  of  branding  them,  when  the  vari- 
ous farmers  in  the  same  neighborhood,  always  convene,  at  each  point  de- 
signated, for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining,  whether  their  cattle  are  intermin- 
gfed  with  those  of  their  neighbors.     Cattle  were  reared,formerly  ,for  their 
hides  only,  but  latterly,  they  are  reared  for  their  hides,  tallow  and  beef. 
Several  respectable  gentlemen  informed  me,  that  formerly,  it  was  very  com- 
mon for  persons  to  kill,  hundreds  and  thousands,  of  their  cattle  merely  for 
their  hides,  leaving  the  beef  of  innumeraole,  fine,  fat  cattle  to  the  wolves 
and  buzzards.     The  same  gentlemen  also  informed  me,  that  in  traveling 
through  the  plains  of  the  interior,  they  had  often  seen  the  ground  strewed, 
with  many  hundreds,  of  large,  fat  cattle,  which  had  been  killed,  merely  for 
the  hides,  and  that  the  bodies  being  thus  exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  th?-- 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  95 

tallow  was  actually  exuding^  from  them,  to  such  an  extent,  that  the  surfac« 
Oi  the  ground  was  actually  saturated  with  it,  for  several  feet,  around  each* 
Tbis  affords  another  instance,  of  the  destructive  prodigality  of  the  Mex- 
icans, which,  however,  is  not  latterly  pursued,  but  the  course  pursued  by 
them  now,  would  not  be  considered  sufficiently  frugal  by  an  American, 
as  many  gf  them  weekly  kill,  three  or  four  beeves,  which  are  either  used 
or  thrown  away,  by  themselves,  or  their  servants.  As  has  been  before 
remarked,  both  cattle  and  horses  are  now  driven,  in  large  numbers,  to 
Oregon,  and  the  presumption  is,  that  the  increasing  emigration,  to  that 
country,  will  render  it  an  extensive  market,  for  the  various  herds  of  this 
country,  for  many  years  to  come. 

Much  attention  is  latterly  paid  to  the  rearing  of  sheep,  which  are  now 
found  in  great  numbers,  and  which  are  of  a  very  superior  kind.     They 
thrive  extremely  well,  in  all  the  various  portions  of  the  country,  but  more 
particularly ,in  the  more  elevated  and  mountainous  regions.     They  are 
equally  as  large,  and  produce  quite  as  much  wool  as  ours,  but  it  is  of 
rather  a  coarser  quality;  which  fict  is,  perhaps,  partly  attributable  to  the 
ciimatej  but  mostly  to  a  total  neglect  in  reference  to  their  improvement. 
They  produce  their  young  twice  annually,  and  many  of  the  males  have 
two  distinct  pairs  of  horns,  or  four  horns,  two  upon  each  side  of  their  heads, 
€achc6iling  repeatedly  around,  as  do  those  of  the  ordinary  sheep.     Many 
of  the  farmers  have  as  many  as  ten  or  twelve  thousand,  of  the  wool  of 
which,  various  kinds  of  coarse  cloths  and  blankets,  are  manufactured. 
Sheep  are  also  now  driven  to  Oregon,  in  numbers  sufficient  to  supply  all 
the  different  settlers.     The  Hudson's  Bay  Company  has,  latterly,  driven 
many  to  that  country,  with  which,  all  its  various  forts,  and  settlements  are 
supplied.     Hogs  are  now  reared,  by  the  Mexicans,  in  all  the  different 
settlements,  but  not  with  a  view  of  making  pork  ;  for,rrom  some  religious 
scruple,  or  some  other  scruple,  or  perhaps,  from  a  dislike  to  eat  his  kind, 
a  Mexican  will  not  eat  pork.    Hogs  arc,  therefore,  reared  by  them,  merely 
for  the  purpose  of  making  soap,  of  which,  by  the  by,  they  require  large 
quantities.     From  the  extraordinary  abundance  of  mast  here  found,  the 
nogs  are  always  fat,  so  that  they  require  no  feeding,  at  any  season  of  the 
year.     Besides  the  various  fruits  upon  which  they  subsist,  there  are  also, 
very  great  quantities  of  edible  roots,  upon  which,  as  well  as  upon  the 
oats,  clover  and  the  like,  they  subsist,  previous  to  the  filling  of  the  mast. 
Hogs,  like  all  other  animals  here,  increase  to  an  extent,  almost  unpar- 
alleled, but  they  are  rather  inferior  to  ours,  yet  they  are  equally  as  large, 
I  weighing,  usually,  from  one  hundred,  to  six  hundred  pounds.     Herdsmen 
I  are  always  employed,  by  the  different  farmers,  to  take  charge,  not  only 
'  of  the  herds  of  horses,  but  also  of  the  cattle,  sheep,  and  hogs.     These 
:  herdsmen  always  remain  with,  or  in  the  immediate  vicinity,  of  the  differ^ 
i  ©it  herds,  driving  them  from  place  to  place,  as  circumstances  may  require, 
:  with  a  view  of  protecting  them  from  the  incursions    of  the  Indians  and 
I  wolves.     The  herdsmen  thus  employed,  are  either,  Indians,  or  the  lower 
I  order  of  Mexicans,  who  are  well  skilled  in  their  particular  business,  to 
which,  they  are  very  attentive,  and  in  which,  they  appear  to  enjoy,  al- 
I  most  infinite  delight.     The  Eastern  section  is  also,  well  adapted  to  tlw 
rearmg  of  herds  of  all  kinds,  though  as  before  remarked,  it  is  not  as  emi- 
nently suited  to  this  purpose,  as  the  Western  section.     That  this  section 
'  is  suited  in  more  than  an  ordinary  degree,  to  grazing  purposes,  will  be 
jeadily  collected  from  what  has  been  said,  upon  the  former  pages,  jn 


flR  THE  EMIGRANTS*  GUIDE 

reference  to  its  climate  and  productions,  but,  as  no  experiments  have  been 
made,  in  this  respect,  nothing  can  be  said  with  definite  exactness  ;  enough, 
however,  has  been  said  to  enable  each,  to  draw  his  own  conclusiom^ 
with  some  degree  of  correctness. 

The  game  of  the  Western  section,  consists,  for  the  most  part,  of  ell^ 
deer,  antelope,  bear,  wolves,  goats,  foxes,  squirrels,  racoons,  martens, 
muskrats,  beavers,  otters  and  seals.  The  most  numerous  of  these,  ane 
the  elk  and  antelope,  which  are  found  in  immense  numbers,  in  all  the 
various  plains  and  valleys,  and  upon  the  hills  and  mountains.  It  is  very 
common  to  see  herds,  of  five  or  six  hundred  elk,  ranging  from  vale  to 
vale,  amid  the  oats,  clovftr  and  flax,  with  which,  the  plains  and  valleys 
everywhere  abound.  I  remember  to  have  been  riding  through  these 
plains,  with  a  countryman  of  ours,  when,  just  as  we  passed  a  point  of 
timbcrt'd  country,  near  the  river,  about  four  or  five  hundred  elk  emerged 
from  the  woods.  As  they  were  passing,  score  after  score,  in  quick  suc- 
cession, I  suggested  to  my  companion,  the  propriety  of  shooting  one  of 
them,  to  which  he  replied,  that  he  'intended  to  do  so,"  but  made  no  other 
arrangements,  than  to  dismount.  Now,  fearing  that  he  would  not  shoot, 
until  they  had  all  passed,  I  inquired  why  he  did  not  shoot.  Fie  replied, 
that  he  "would  in  a  moment,"  but  he  permitted  them  all  to  pass,  excepting 
the  very  last,  which  he  shot,  as  soon  as  it  came  opposite  to  him,  when  k 
ran  a  shoi  t  distance,  but  soon  fell.  We  were  instantly  at  the  spot,  when 
the  Califiiniia  hunter  commenced  to  divest  our  victim,  of  its  outer  gar- 
ment. During  this  process,  I  inquired  of  him,  why  he  did  not  shoot  be- 
fore, when  they  were  much  nearer  him,  and  the  opportunity  was  so  much 
more  favorable.  He  replied,  that  he  saw  I  was  no  hunter.  "The  one 
behind,"  said  he,  '•!  selected  because  it  was  the  flittest,  and  I  knew  it  was 
the  fattest  because  it  was  behind,  for  the  fat  ones  cannot  run  as  fast  as  the 
lean  ones."  This  vi^-w  I  found  to  be  correct,  for  a  fatter  animal,  I  never 
Saw,  in  California  or  elsewhere.  In  every  part  of  the  country,  through 
which  I  passed,  I  found  them  equally  abundant.  Many  of  the  farmers, 
instead  of  killing  their  cattle,  go,  or  send  their  servants  out,  whenever 
they  wish  to  secure  a  supply  of  meat,  and  kill  as  many  as  they  may  re- 
quire, for  their  families,  and  the  Indians  in  their  service.  Several  of  these 
gentlemen  informed  me,  that  they  had,  very  frequently,  killed  seven  or 
eight  each  morning,  and  in  less  time  than  one  hour.  The  elk  here,  are 
always  very  fat,  and  they  make  the  very  best  of  beef,  which  is,  in  fact, 
much  tenderer  and  sweeter,  than  that  of  our  common  cattle.  They  are 
much  larger  than  those  which  are  found  on  this  side  of  the  mountains, 
weighing  usually  from  three  to  six  hundred  pounds.  They  can  be  as 
certainly  relied  upon,,  for  their  meat,  as  the  common  cattle,  for  they  are 
very  nearly  as  domestic.  They  are  very  easily  domesticated,  in  which 
state,  they  are  even  now  found,  in  various  portions  of  this  section,  and  are 
seen  intermingling  with  other  domestic  animals  upon  the  farms. 

The  antelope  are  equally  as  numerous  as  the  elk,  and  are  much  more 
domestic.  In  whatever  direction  you  travel,  you  will  see  many  hundreds 
of  them,  either  grazing  upon  the  plains,  or  collecting  in  large  flocks,  in  the 
shades  of  the  scattering  pines,  throughout  the  plains.  They  are  beautiful 
Animals,  but  neither  their  skin  nor  flesh,  is  as  valuable  as  that  of  the  eik» 
Their  skins  are  much  less  valuable,  because  of  their  thinness,  and  hence, 
inadaptation  to  the  making  of  leather.  In  this  respect,  they  very  much 
resemble  the  skin  of  the  deer,  as  which,  they  are  equally  as  thick  and  vat 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  97 

tiBble.  Their  flesh  is  much  tenderer,  than  that  of  either,  tlie  elk  or  deer, 
but  it  is  also  much  leaner,  and  consequently,  much  less  nutritious. 
These  animals  have  many  peculiarities,  some  of  which  are,  perhaps, 
worthy  of  a  partial  notice.  They  are  extremely  domestic,  so  much  so, 
that  they  will,  at  times,  remain  in  the  shades  of  the  trees,  until  you  ap- 
proach within  a  very  few  rods  of  them,  when  they  will  bound  off  slowly, 
occasionally  stopping,  and  turning  towards  you,  then  again,  leaping  slowly 
away.  Large  numbers  of  them,  will  very  often,  trot  directly  towards  you, 
and  gazing  intensely  at  you,  they  will  thus  approach,  within  eight  or  ten 
rods  of  you,  when  they  will  leap  frightfully  away,  a  distance  of  several 
rods,  then  turning  towards  you  again,  they  will,  with  a  fast  pace,  approach 
very  near  to  you,  as  before,  then  standing  and  looking  eagerly  at  you,  they 
remain  until  their  timidity  is  again  aroused,  when  they  again  bound  swift- 
ly away.  They  thus  approach,  and  re-approach,  very  frequently,  and 
until  their  curiosity  is  satisfied,  or  their  fears  are  aroused,  when  they  leap 
and  bound  away,  with  the  velocity  of  light,  and  are  soon  lost  in  the  stall- 
worth  vegetation,  of  the  vast  valleys.  Their  curiosity  is  evidendy  exci- 
ted, which  is  the  cause  of  their  thus,  approaching  and  re-approaching. 
Those  who  are  acquainted  with  their  peculiarity,  in  this  respect,  are  fre- 
quently, able  to  kill  many  of  them,  merely  by  distending  a  red  handker- 
chief, or  any  red  cloth,  which  will  so  attract  their  attention,  that  they  will, 
immediately  advance,  within  a  few  rods  of  them,  where  they  will  stand, 
gazing  upon  the  cloth,  until  they  are  fired  upon,  when  those  which  are 
not  affected  by  the  fire,  gallop  slowly  away  a  few  rods,  when  they  again 
advance  as  before.  This  is  frequently  repeated,  until  dozens  of  them 
have  fallen  victims,  to  their  inherent  curiosit)  .  The  deer  are  much  less 
numerous,  than  either  the  elk,  or  antelope,  but  they  are  much  more  plen- 
tiful, than  they  are  in  the  States.  There  are  various  kinds  of  the  deer, 
found  in  this  section,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  white  tailed,  the  black 
tailed  and  the  moose  deer.  All  of  these  abound  in  every  part  of  this  sec- 
tion, but  because  of  their  comparative  wildness,  and  the  great  abundance 
of  preferable  game,  they  are  very  seldom  hunted. 

Several  kinds  of  bear  are  also  found,  such  as  the  black,  brown  and  griz- 
zly bear,  all  of  which,  are  found  in  great  abundance,  especially,  the  blown 
bear,  which  are,  frequently  seen  in  herds,  of  fifteen  or  twenty  in  number. 
Their  flesh  is  much  admired  by  the  Mexicans,as  food,  consequently,  they 
are  much  hunted;  and  those  are  often  found,  that  weigh  twelve  or  fifteen 
hundred  pounds.  It  is  very  difficult  to  distinguish  them  from  the  buffalo, 
when  at  a  distance,  for  they  very  much  resemble  them,  both  in  color  and 
size.  They  are  ferocious,  only  when  attacked,  when  they  will  readily 
give  battle,  which  they  conduct  with  almost  unparalleled  fury  and  success. 
Upon  being  attacked,  they  stop  a  few  moments,  and  until  they  have  suc- 
cessfully repelled  every  assault,  of  either  man  or  dog,  when  they  again 
move  swingingly  on,  until  they  have  secured  a  safe  retreat.  The  rifle 
and  the  "  lasso  "  are,  the  only  weapons,  against  which,  they  can  not  suc- 
cessfully contend.  When  a  foreigner,  with  a  good  rifle,  carrying  about 
eighteen  balls  to  the  pound,  happens  to  come  in  contact  with  one  of  themt 
the  contest  is  soon  over  ;  the  king  of  the  forest  is  slain.  The. "lasso  " 
of  the  Mexicans,  is  a  weapon,  which  is  also  found,  too  formidable  for  his 
majesty^  under  the  repeated  assaults  of  which,  he  is  very  readily  made  to 
recoil.     The  process  bv  which,  the  Mexicans  thus  take  them,  is  very  in- 

^       13  ' 


^  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

teresting,  especially  to  those  who  are  unacquainted  with  Mexican  mannere 
and  customs.  When  they  wish  to  capture  one  of  these  formidable  an- 
imals, five  or  six  of  tliem,  with  chosen,  and  trained  horses,  sally  forth,  to 
his  usual  haunts,  where,  at  any  time,  large  numbers  are  found.  Each 
being  supplied  with  a  strong  "  lasso,"  and  an  abundant  supply  of  knives, 
swords  and  the  like,  the  battle  now  commences  ;  one  party  having  a  de- 
cided advantage,  in  the  multiplicity  of  weapons,  and  speed,  and  the  other^ 
having  vastly  the  advantage,  in  physical  strength  and  courage.  The  as- 
sault, is  generally,  first  made  by  the  Mexicans,  who  commence  a  most  fu- 
rious, running  charge,  both  from  the  front  and  rear.  Seeing  his  precari- 
ous predicament,  the  bear  meets  the  charge  from  the  front,  with  such  ac- 
cumulating ferocity  and  violence,  that  his  assailants  are  soon  put  to  flight, 
when  he  shakes  his  ponderous  head,  utters  a  most  terrific  growl,  and  com- 
mences a  hot  pursuit ;  but  soon,  the  Mexican  forces,  are  brought  to  bear 
upon  his  rear  ;  his  hindmost  legs  are  entangled  in  the  "lasso  ;"  and  he 
is  prostrated  upon  his  back,  uttering  most  piteous,  growling  cries.  The 
forces  of  the  assailants,  are  now  united,  and  a  lasso  is  also  thrown  upon 
his  neck,  when  the  spurs  are  rapidly  plied  to  the  horses,  which  now  ex- 
exert  every  energy,  every  nerve,  and  soon,  the  powerful  victim  is  distend- 
ed upon  the  ground,  in  an  entirely  defenceless  condition.  As  their  victim 
is  now  completely  in  their  pov/er,  they  proceed  to  attach  a  "  lasso  "  to  al- 
most every  limb,  which  being  done,  they  move  o^,  either  rapidly  or  slow- 
ly, as  their  preference  and  the  weight,  of  their  victim,  may  happen  to  sug- 
gest. Bear  are  taken  in  this  manner,  only  when  it  is  desired  to  take 
them  alive,  for  the  purpose  of  bear-baiting.  The  black  and  grizzly  bear, 
are  not  as  numerous  as  the  brown  bear,  yet  when  compared  with  those  of 
any  other  country,  with  which  I  am  acquainted,  they  may  be  said  to  be 
very  numerous.  In  almost  every  direction,  in  which  you  travel,  through 
the  plains  and  mountains,  you  will  very  frequently  see,  herds  of  ten  or 
fifteen  in  number,  many  of  which,  are  equally  as  large  as  the  brown  bear, 
but  they  are  generally  much  smaller,  weighing  from  five,  to  twelve  hun- 
dred pounds.  These  are  also  taken  by  the  Mexicans,  in  the  manner 
above  stated,  but  in  much  less  numbers,  than  the  brown  bear.  Capturing 
the  bear,  in  this  manner,  is  one  of  the  chief  amusements  of  the  Mexi- 
cans, and  they  really  evince  an  energy  and  bravery,  in  this  kind  of  con- 
flict, to  which  they  are  entire  strangers,  when  in  conflict  with  men,  and 
especially  Texians. 

Wolves  are  very  numerous  in  all  portions  of  this  section,  among  which, 
are  the  black,  gray,  and  the  prairie  wolves ;  the  latter  of  which,  are  very 
small,  but  they  are  much  the  most  numerous  and  troublesome.  Of  the 
former,  the  gray  wolf  is  much  the  most  numerous,  but  the  black  wolf  is 
much  the  largest,  being  generally  about  the  size  of  our  common  large 
mastiffs.  All  the  different  kinds  of  wolves,  are  very  troublesome  in  all 
the  various  settlements,  into  which  they  make  very  frequent  inroads,  not 
only  destroying  the  hogs  and  sheep,  W  also,  frequently  attacking  and 
destroying  even  the  grown  cattle.  The  cause  of  there  being  such  an 
abundance  of  all  the  different  kinds  of  wolves,  is,  perhaps,  that  they  are 
never  killed,  either  by  the  Mexicans  or  foreigners.  They  do  not  kill 
them,  because  they  are  entirely  worthless,  and  because  the  people  in 
that  country,  have  not  a  superabundance  of  ammunition.  In  traveling 
through  the  valleys  of  this  section,  you  will  pass  many  hundreds  of  them, 
during  the  day,  which  appear  to  evince  no  timidity,  but  with  heads  and 


TO    OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA  99 

tails  down,  in  their  natural  crouching-  manner,  they  pass  within  a  very- 
few  rods  of  you.  As  shooting  them  would  be  a  waste  of  so  much  ammu- 
nition, you  allow  them  to  pass  unmolested,  and  thus,  their  timidity  is  dimin 
ished,  and  their  familiarity  and  numbers  are  increased.  The  fur-bearing 
animals  are  much  more  numerous  in  this  section,  than  in  any  other  portion 
of  the  country,  west  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  especially  the  beavers, 
otters,  muskrats  and  seals.  Besides  these,  there  are  all  tho.^e,  enumerated 
upon  another  page,  which,  however,  are  much  less  numerous.  There 
are  many  persons  here  who  follow  trapping  as  a  business,  and  who  suc- 
ceed extremely  well.  The  Hudson's  Bay  Company  extends  its  opera- 
tions, to  this  country  also,  where  in  fact,  it  obtains  a  greater  portion,  of  its 
annual  collections  of  peltries.  An  edict  was  recently  issued  by  the  gov- 
ernment of  California,  which  required  that  company  to  discontinue  the 
business  of  trapping  in  that  country;  so  far,  however,  it  had  proved  en- 
tirely inoperative.  The  trappers,  of  that  company,  were  still  trapping, 
in  that  country  when  I  left,  and  their  labors  were  attended  with  extraor- 
dinary success.  Much  more  regard  is  here  had,  to  the  preservation  of  the 
fur-bearing  animals;  a  governmental  regulation  exists,  which  requires 
the  trappers  to  take  them,  with  strict  reference  to  the  proper  season,  which 
has  tended  very  much,  to  prevent  their  diminution.  The  game,  of  the 
Eastern  section,  is  very  much  the  same,  as  that  in  the  Western  section, 
with  very  few  exceptions,  all  the  different  species  found  in  that,  are  also 
found  in  this  section.  In  addition,  however,  to  the  game  found  in  that 
section,  the  white  bear,  the  mountain  sheep  and  the  buffalo,  are  also 
found,  in  this  section.  The  latter  of  which,  are  here  found  in  much 
greater  numbers,  than  in  any  other  portion  of  the  country,  west  of  the 
Rocky  mountains.  In  many  portions  of  the  country,  the  plains  and  hills 
are  literally  covered  with  them.  Several  tribes  of  the  Indians  here,  as 
in  Oregon,  subsist  almost  entirely  upon  the  beef  of  the  buffalo,  which 
they  are  enabled  to  obtain,  in  any  desired  quantities. 

The  feathered  animals,  of  the  Western  section,  consist  chiefly,  of  geese, 
ducks,  brants,  cranes,  gulls,  pelicans,  plovers,  eagles,  hawks,  ravens, 
woodpeckers,  pheasants,  partridges,  grouse,  snow-birds,  blue-birds,  black- 
birds, and  robins,  with  a  great  variety  of  other  birds,  common  in  the 
States.  The  former  of  these,  and  especially  the  water-fowls,  are  vastly 
numerous,  particularly  upon  the  coast,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  the  rivers, 
bays  and  harbors.  During  the  winter  and  spring  seasons,  all  the  various 
lakes,  bays  and  rivers,  as  well  as  the  low  lands,  and  wheat  fields,  throughout 
the  whole  country,  are  literally  covered  with  the  various  water-fowls,  which 
appear  to  have  convened  here  from  all  the  northern  world.  In  many  por- 
tions of  the  country,  during  these  seasons,  they  congregate  in  such  immense 
numbers,  that  their  unceasing  confusion  proves  noisome  in  the  extreme,  lo 
the  settlers.  The  wheat  fields  and  the  low  lands  are  their  usual  haunts,  dur- 
ing the  winter,  when  hundreds  of  them,  may  be  killed,  in  a  few  hours,  I 
was  informed  that  one  man,  could  at  any  time,  during  the  winter,  obtain  feath- 
ers sufficient  for  a  feather-bed,  from  those  which  he  could  kill  in  a  very  few 
hours.  When  passing  down  the  Sacramento  river,  and  crossing  the  bay 
of  St.  Francisco.  I  have  frequently  been  greatly  annoyed,  by  the  almost 
deafening,  tumultuous  and  confused  noises,  of  the  innumerable  flocks,  of 
geese  and  ducks,  which  were  continually  flying  to  and  fro,  and  at  times, 
blackening  the  very  heavens  with  their  increasing  numbers,  and  making 
the  serial  region  ring,  v/itii  their  tumultuous  croaking  and   vehement 


100  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

squeaking.  During  the  winter  season,  California  is  truly,  a  noisy,  turbu- 
lent region  ;  all  the  northern  world,  seems  to  have  given  up,  its  million* 
of  the  feathered  tribes,  which  are  here  in  universal  convention,  having- 
complete  possession,  of  the  entire  country.  However  noisome  the  in- 
creasing numbers,  and  the  confused  noise  of  these  multifarious  proprietors 
of  California,  may  be  to  the  settlers,  there  is  no  prospect  of  any  diminu- 
tion of  either,  for  they  are  assembled  here,  by  millions,  merely  to  propa- 
gate their  kind,  and  to  teach  their  squeaking  young,  the  art  of  noisy  clamor. 
The  fowls  of  the  Eastern  section,  are,  with  very  few  exceptions,  the  same 
as  those  of  the  Western  section ;  yet  many  kinds  found  m  that  section,  are 
found  in  much  less  abundance  in  this,  especially  the  various  water-fowls, 
but  compared  to  any  portion  of  the  States,  they  would  ,be  called  very 
abundant.  As  they  congregate  in  this  region,  merely  to  enjoy  its  de- 
lightful climate,  and  propagate  their  kind,  it  is  said,  that  there  are  nu- 
merous places,  where  many  bushels  of  their  eggs,  may  be  obtained  in  a 
few  hours.  This,  however,  is  the  case  only  in  the  Western  section,  where 
I  have  no  doubt,  but  that  it  occurs,  for  to  my  own  knowledge,  as  before 
remarked,  there  are  many  places,  where  the  ground  is  literally  covered, 
and  the  whole  heavens  completely  blackened,  with  innumerable  flocks, 
of  countless  numbers,  of  geese,  ducks,  brants,  cranes  and  all  the  various 
noisy  tribes,  of  all  the  feathered  creation. 

The  fish  and  fisheries,  of  this  country,  will  next,  receive  a  passing  no- 
tice, the  former  of  which,  are  unusually  plentiful,  in  the  V/estern  section, 
consisting,  cheifly,  of  salmon,  salmon-trout,  cod,  sturgeon,  flounders,  carp, 
perch,  ray,  lampreys,  smelt  and  eels.     A  very  great  variety  of  shell  fish, 
such  as  clams,  oysters,  crabs  and  muscles,  abound,  in  all  the  various  bays 
and  inlets  in  the  greatest  profusion.     Whales  are  also   very  numerous- 
everywhere  upon  the  coast,  and  even  in   many  of  the  different  bays. 
There  are  various  kinds  of  the  salmon,  which  are  the  most  numerous, 
and  much  the  best  fish,  found  in  this  country,  or  perhaps  in  any  other 
country,  for  I  am  of  the  opinion,  that  they  are  much  the  finest  fish,  any 
where  taken.     They  are  much  superior  to  the  salmon  of  the  States,  both 
in  flavor  and  size.     Their  usual  weight  is  from  ten,  to  fifty  pounds,  and 
their  length  from  eighteen  inches,  to  four  feet.     These,  as  well  as  the 
various  other  kinds  enumerated,  abound  in  all  the  various  rivers  of  the 
interior,  and  in  all  the  different  inlets  and  bays,  where  they  are  taken  at 
any  season  of  the  year,  but  they  are  much  more  abundant,  during  the 
spring  and  autumn,  at  which  seasons,  all  the  waters  are  literally  full  of 
them,  which  is  evinced  by  their  incessant  leaping  and  plunging.     They 
commence  to  run  in  April  and  October,  of  each  year,  each  run  continuing 
about  two  months,  during  all  which  seasons,  both  Indians  and  whites  are 
more  or  less  employed,  in  securing  their  supplies  for  the  residue  of  th6 
year,  but  they  are  taken  chiefly,  by  the  Indians,  who  here,  as  in  Oregon, 
take  them  by  a  great  variety  of  methods.     They  take  them  chiefly,  how- 
ever, with  seines,  which  they  manufacture,  and  which  are  of  a  very  good 
kind,  answering  all  the  purposes  of  the  ordinary  seines,  used  by  our  peo- 
ple.    With  these,  they  are  able,  at  certain  times,  to  take  fifteen  or  twenty 
barrels,  at  a  single  draught,  which  they  repeat  with  surprising  rapidity. 
Many  of  the  Mexicans  subsist  almost  entirely  upon  them,  while  many  of 
the  Indians,  live  wholly  upon  them,  especially,  during  the  seasons  of  their 
greatest  abundance.     They  are  used  by  the  whites  in  their  fresh,  dried,^ 
or  pickled  state,  while  the  Indians  use  them,  in  their  fresh  or  dried  state 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  101 

only.  They  are  dried  and  prepared  here,  as  in  Oregon,  merely  by  ex- 
posing them  to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  without  the  aid  of  salt,  or  any  other 
preservative,  as  ample  preservative  properties  arc  found  in  the  extreme 
purity  of  the  atmosphere.  The  oysters  are  rather  smaller,  than  those 
found  upon  the  Atlantic  side,  but  they  are  of  a  very  excellent  kind,  being 
inferior  in  flavor  and  in  deliciousness  to  none.  They  also,  as  well  as  the 
clams  and  muscles,  are  taken  both  by  the  Mexicans  and  Indians,  in  very 
great  quantities,  which  also  form  a  principal  item  of  their  food.  Whales 
are  also  vastly  numerous,  not  only  in  the  ocean,  but  also  in  most  of  the 
bays  and  inlets,  and  especially,  in  the  bay  of  Monterey,  where  many  are 
very  frequently  seen,  even  from  the  streets,  alternately  leaping  and  plung- 
ing, in  the  different  portions  of  the  bay;  first  exhibiting  their  ponderous 
heads,  throwing  up  vast  torrents  of  water,  which  are  falling  in  misty 
spray,  then  plunging  and  sinking  slowly  away,  displaying  their  pro- 
tracted backs,  and  flirting  their  tails,  amid  the  convulsed  waters,  they  dis- 
appear. While  some  are  plunging,  others  are  leaping,  as  some  appear, 
others  disappear,  and  thus,  is  the  otherwise  calm  and  Pacific  ocean,  kept 
in  incessant  commotion.  What  adds  the  greatest  importance  to  these 
scenes,  is  the  fact,  that  they  are  constantly  being  enacted,  and  that  too, 
in  the  very  midst  of  the  ships,  barques  and  brigs,  in  harbor,  and  in  full 
view  of  the  gentlemen  in  their  offices,  and  the  ladies  in  their  parlors. 
A  strange  commingling  of  oceanic  and  terrestrial  beings  !  The  fish  of 
the  Eastern  section,  are  not  as  numerous  as  those  of  the  Western  section, 
nor  is  there  the  same  variety  in  that  section,  yet,  all  the  rivers  of  that 
section,  also  abound  with  several  kinds  of  the  salmon,  salmon  trout,  carp, 
herring,  perch,  ray  and  flounders.  The  great  salt  lake,  of  that  section, 
is  also,  said  to  abound  with  a  great  variety  of  excellent  fish.  The  fish- 
eries of  the  Western  section,  are  innumerable,  and  inexhaustible,  and 
they  are  found  in  every  portion  of  the  country,  both  upon  the  coast,  and 
in  the  interior,  but  from  the  very  partial  demand  for  the  fish,  the  various 
fisheries,  have  not  been  brought  into  requisition.  The  principal  fisheries^ 
which  are  now  used,  to  much  extent,  are  those  upon  the  different  rivers. 
and  which  are  usually  possessed,  by  the  various  tribes  of  Indians.  It  is 
thought  that  the  fisheries  of  this  country,  will  not  be  found  inferior  to 
tiiose  of  Newfoundland,  and  they  certainly  will  not,  in  reference  to  their 
numbers,  the  quality  of  their  fish,  or  their  inexhaustibleness. 


103  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

CHAPTER  XI. 
A  DESCKIPTON  OF  CALIFOENIA. 

Settlement  and  improvement.  Forts  ;  description  of.  New  Helvetia  ;  des- 
cription of;  Capt.  Gutter  in  charge  of  Suspicions  of  Mexicans.  De- 
termination to  expel  Capt.  Sutter  from  the  country  ;  that  purpose  aban- 
doned. Pretended  friendship  of  Mexicans.  Character  of  Capt.  Sutter  ; 
his  military  taste  ;  his  kindness  and  hospitality.  Ross ;  description  of 
Military  posts;  number  of;  number  of  soldiers  and  cannon  at  each;  ineffi- 
cacy  of.  Military  strength;  deficiency  of.  Missionary  stations;  number  of; 
how  conducted;  instruments  oj  cruelty  and  oppression.  Towns;  description 
of.  Foabalo  below-.  Monterey ;  present  seat  of  governm.ent,  Poabalo  above. 
Yerba  Buena;  trading  establishment  of  the  Hudson^ s  Bay  Company  at; 
Mr.  Ray  in  charge;  his  courtesy  and  hospitality.  Sonoma;  beautiful 
situation  of.  Settlements  disconnected  with  the  forts,  missions  and  towns. 
Settlement  upon  the  Sacramento;  composed  chiefly  of  Americans  ;  prosper- 
ous condition  of.  Improvements;  buildings;  fencing.  Mills;  number  of; 
by  whom  owned.  Steam  saw-mill.  Steam  fouring-mill.  Water  power; 
extent  of     New  era  in  improvements. 

The  settlements  and  improvements  are,  chiefly,  in  connection  with  the 
different  forts,  military  posts,  and  missionary  stations,  and  at  the  various 
towns,  all  of  which  are  confined  entirely,  to  the  Western  section.  Of 
these,  I  shall  first  notice,  the  forts  and  military  posts,  of  the  former  of 
which,  there  are  but  two,  one  of  which,  is  called  New  Helvetia,  and  the 
other  is  called  Ross.  Both  of  these  are  now  in  the  possession  of,  and 
owned  by.  Captain  Sutter,  the  former  of  which  he  built,  and  the  latter  he 
purchased  of  the  Russians,  New  Helvetia,  the  most  important  of  these, 
is  situated  in  a  well  chosen  position,  on  the  south  side  of  the  Sacramento, 
about  one  mile  from  its  south  bank,  100  miles,  east  by  north,  from  Yerba 
Buena,  at  latitude  38°  45'  42"  north.  In  form,  it  is  a  sexangular  ob- 
long, its  greatest  length  being  428  feet,  and  its  greatest  width,  178  feet; 
233  feet  of  its  length  being  17'<  feet  wide,  and  the  residue  but  129Jeet  wide. 
It  is  inclosed  by  permanent  "adobie"  walls,  which  are  18  feet  high,  and 
three  feet  thick,  with  bastions  at  the  corners,  the  walls  of  which,  are  five 
feet  thick.  It  is  entered  by  three  large  swinging  gates,  one  of  which,  is 
on  the  north,  another  on  the  south  side,  and  the  third  at  the  east  end. — 
The  first  of  these,  is  entirely  inaccessible  from  without,  because  of  a 
deep,  and  impassable  ravine,  which  extends  the  whole  length  of  the  fort, 
on  the  north  ;  on  each  side  of  the  second,  is  a  platform,  upon  each  of 
which,  a  nine-pounder  is  planted,  and  the  third  is  completely  commanded, 
by  one  of  the  bastions.  There  are  two  bastions,  each  of  which  has  four 
guns,  two  nine-pounders,  and  two  six-pounders ;  and  in  all,  there  are 
twelve  guns,  of  different  caliber.  The  inner  building  of  this  fort,  con- 
sist of  a  large  and  commodious  residence,  for  the^various  officers,  in  con- 
nection with  which,  is  a  large  kitchen,  a  dining  room,  two  large  parlors, 
the  necessary  offices,  shops  and  lodging  apartments.  Besides  these, 
there  is  also  a  distillery,  a  horse-mill  and  a  magazine,  together  with  bar- 
racks, for  the  accommodation  of,  at  least,  one  thousand  soldiers.  In  con- 
nection with  the  fort,  there  are  one  thousand  acres  of  land,  under  a  good 
state  of  cultivation,  and  upon  which  are  all  the  necessary  buildings,  to- 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  103 

gether  with  an  extensive  tannery.  Of  this  fort,  Captain  Sutter  has  charge, 
in  person  ;  he  has  about  one  hundred  men,  constantly  in  his  employment, 
who  annually  sow  one  thousand  acres  of  wheat,  and  have  charge  of  his 
numerous  herds,  which,  in  all,  amount  to  about  twenty  thousand  head. 
Those,  having  charge  of  the  various  herds,  are,  generally,  Indians,  but 
his  building  and  farming,  are  superintended  chiefly  by  foreigners.  He 
also  has,  a  large  number  of  experienced  trappers,  in  his  service,  who 
have  charge  of  about  one  thousand  traps,  and  from  whose  services, he 
annually  realizes  several  thousand  dollars. 

Besides  the  business  thus  carried  on,  by  the  Captain,  he  is  also  doing 
a  very  extensive  business,  in  a  military  way.  All  the  usual  military  for- 
malities, are  regularly  observed ;  sentinels  are  always  kept  out,  day  and 
night,  who  invariably  give  the  captain,  timely  notice  of  the  approach  of 
persons,  during  the  day,  or  of  the  slightest  movement,  of  any  thing,  in 
the  human  form,  during  the  night.  Here  too,  the  natives  are  being  in- 
structed, in  the  art  of  war  ;  forty  or  fiAy  of  them,  are  taken  and  instructed, 
for  several  months,  and  until  they  have  acquired,  a  general  knowledge, 
of  military  tactics ;  when  they  are  turned  off,  and  forty  or  fifty  others  are 
taken,  who  are  drilled  and  trained,  in  the  same  manner,  when  they  are 
also  dismissed,  and  others  taken  in  their  stead,  and  so  on  continually. — 
The  Mexicans,  not  being  able  to  divine  the  cause,  of  all  this  military 
parade,  at  one  time,  became  very  suspicious,  that  all  was  not  right;  and 
finally,  their  suspicions  were  increased  to  such  an  extent,  that  they  deter- 
mined to  effect  the  captain's  unceremonious  expulsion,  from  the  country, 
of  which  determination,  he  was  duly  advised.  The  captain  took  the  mat- 
ter under  consideration,  and  soon  determined,  to  resist  any  attempted  en- 
croachment, upon  his  rights,  and  accordingly'-,  informed  the  government 
of  his  determination.  The  government,  however,  proceeded  to  make  its 
preliminary  arrangements,  for  his  expulsion,  preparatory  to  which,  a  spy 
was  sent,  in  the  disguise  of  a  friend,  to  the  captain's  fort,  in  order  to  ascer- 
tain his  true  position,  as  to  vulnerableness,  and  means  of  resistance. — 
Upon  the  arrival  of  this  mysterious  visitor,  an  enemy  in  disguise,  "a 
wolf  in  sheep's  clothing,"  or  a  Mexican  in  maiib  s  clothing,  the  captain 
soon  suspected  his  object,  and  informed  him,  that  he  must  immediately 
depart,  or  he  would,  at  once,  order  him  to  be  put  in  irons,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  informed  him,  that  if  the  government,  whose  spy  he  was, 
thought  proper  to  attempt  his  expulsion  from  the  country,  he  was  per- 
fectly willing,  at  any  time,  to  test  its  ability  to  accomplish  that  object. — 
This  hypocritical  visitor,  now  made  rather  an  irregular  disappearance,  amid 
the  jeers,  taunts  and  threats,  of  the  captain's  men,  and  if  he  was  not  pre- 
pared to  report  to  his  owners^  that  the  captain  was  invincible,  he  was  (uUy 
prepared  to  report,  that  the  captain  thought  himself  invincible,  which 
would  be  precisely  the  same  thing,  as  far  as  Mexicans  were  concerned. 
The  government,  finding,  that  the  captain  was  not  to  be  deterred,  and  that 
an  attempt  to  effect  his  expulsion,  would  be  attended  with  dangerous  con- 
sequences, of  course^  abandoned  the  undertaking.  Ever  since  that  time, 
the  government  has  treated  the  captain  with  extraordinary  kindness,  be- 
stowing upon  him,  the  office  of  alcalde,  and  other  little  governmental 
favors,  designed  to  repair  the  cloak  of  hypocrisy,  which  had  been  so 
seriously  lacerated,  in  the  above  transaction.  The  truth,  however,  is, 
that  the  Mexicans  look  upon  the  captain, with  much  more  than  ordinary 
suspicion,  notwithstanding  iheir  pretended  friendship  ;  but  whether  they 


104  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

are  justified,  in  viewing  the  captain,  with  some  little  suspicion,  I  do  not 
pretend  to  say,  as  to  that,  each  will  judg-e  for  himself.  Having  heard 
thus  much,  in  reference  to  this  gentleman,  many  might  be  led  to  inquire 
more  particularly,  as  to  the  captain;  I  will  therefore  remark,  that  he  is 
a  Swede  by  birth  ;  he  emigrated,  at  an  early  day,  to  the  United  States, 
where  he  resided  for  several  years,  residing  most  of  the  time,  at  St.  Louis 
and  St.  Charles,  in  Missouri,  and  in  1839,  he  emigrated  to  California, 
where  he  has  since  remained.  His  military  taste,  as  well  as  his  mili- 
tary title,  was  derived  from  his  service  in  Bonapart's  army,  to  which 
he  was  attached,  for  several  years.  A  more  kind  and  hospitable  gentle- 
man, it  has  seldom  been  my  fortune  to  meet.  Such  is  his  treatment  of 
all  foreigners,  who  visit  him,  that  when  they  leave  him,  they  are  com- 
pelled to  do  so,  with  much  regret,  and  under  many  obligations,  for  his 
continued,  untiling  and  gentlemanly  attentions. 

Ross  is  the  other  fort,  to  which  I  have  alluded,  as  belonging  to  captain 
Sutter;  it  is  situated  on  the  coast,  near  the  bay  of Bodaga, at  latitude  38° 
55'  42"  north.  It  is  about  sixty  rods  square,  and  is  inclosed  by  a  strong, 
wooden  wall,  wliich  is  two  feet  thick,  and  eighteen  feet  high.  The  interior 
buildings  consist  of  two  large  and  commodious  dwelling  houses,  for  the 
officers,  two  magazines,  store-houses,  a  prison,  a  chapel,  shops  for  the  vari- 
ous mechanics,  and  barracks  for  several  hundred  soldiers.  In  connection 
with  the  fort,  there  is  a  large  farm,  about  two  hundred  acres  of  which,  are  in 
a  good  state  of  cultivation,  and  upon  which,  there  is  a  good  orchard,  a  vino- 
yard,  ahorse  and  wind-mill  and  several  dwelling-houses,  stables  and  barns. 
Agriculturalpursuits,  and  the  rearing  of  herds  of  cattle,  horses  and  sheep, 
are  the  chief  objects  of  attention,  at  this  establishment.  Such  persons 
are  in  charge,  from  time  to  time,  as  the  captain  designates  for  that  purpose. 
Here  as  at  New  Helvetia,  large  numbers  of  Indians  are  also  employed, 
who  conduct  the  agricultural  operations,  and  who  have  charge  of  the  va- 
rious herds.  A  great  abundance  of  fruit,  such  as  apples,  pears,  and 
peaches,  is  here,  annually  produced,  and  perhaps,  in  greater  quantities, 
than  in  any  other  portion,  of  the  country. 

The  military  posts,  which  belong  to  the  government,  I  will  now  merely 
enumerate,  without  giving  a  description  of  each,  for  to  do  which,  would 
extend  these  pages  far  beyond  their  present  limits,  and  would,  perhaps, 
convey  no  very  important  additional  information.  All  that  is  deemed  ne- 
cessary, then,  will  be  merely  to  give  the  names,  of  each  post,  together 
with  the  number  of  soldiers  and  cannons  at,  and  in  connection  with  each. 
At  Paobalo  below,  there  are  thirty  soldiers,  and  twelve  cannons;  at  St. 
Deigo,  there  are  twelve  soldiers,  and  two  cannons ;  at  Santa  Barbara, 
there  are  twenty  soldiers,  and  six  cannons ;  and  at  Monterey,  there  are  two 
hundred  soldiers,  and  twelve  cannons  ;  at  Santa  Cruz,  six  soldiers  and 
two  cannons ;  at  St.  Joseph,  six  soldiers,  and  two  cannons ;  at  St.  Fran- 
cisco, fifteen  soldiers,  and  six  cannons ;  and  at  Sonoma,  thirty  soldiers, 
and  five  cannons.  None  of  these  are  forts,  nor  are  they  properly,  military 
posts ;  they  consist  in  nothing  more,  than  a  few  men  being  stationed,  at 
the  different  towns,  and  missions  above  enumerated,  with  a  few  guns  at 
each,  which,  however,are  never  in  order  for  use,  nor  are  they  designed  for 
use.  The  object  of  these  posts,  as  they  are  called,  appears,  merely  to  be, 
to  awe  the  lower  order  of  Mexicans,  into  submission  to  the  law,  and  the 
observance  of  order,  and  an  empty  gun,  answers  that  purpose,  as  well  as 
a  loaded  one.     As  an  instance  of  Uie  inaptitude,  of  these  posts,  for  the 


[ 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  I0b 

proseciUion  of  successful  warfare,  citlier  offensive,  or  defensive,  I  will  re- 
late an  occurrence,  wSiich  was  narrated  to  ino,  by  a  gentleman  at  St. 
Francisco.  Upon  the  arrival  of  an  American  man  of  war,  into  the  bay 
of  St.  Francisco,  a  messenger  was  dispatched,  from  on  board,  to  the  mil- 
itavy  post  at  that  place,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining,  whetlier  the  ofli- 
cer  in  command,  would  return  a  salute,  if  fired  from  ihe  ship.  The  offi- 
cer hesitated  for  a  moment,  but  finally  replied,  that  he  was  entirely  out  of 
powder,  but  tliat  he  would  endeavor  to  get  some,  and  return  the  salute. 
He  made  several  unsuccessful  efibrts,  at  the  difierent  stores,  where  it  ap- 
peared that  neither  himself,  nor  his  government,  had  any  credit,  but  final- 
ly, my  informant  furnished  him  with  the  powder,  upon  a  credit,  when  the 
officer  repaired  to  iiis  post,  and  after  working  with  an  old,  rusiy  cannon,  a 
few  hours,  he  informed  the  commander  of  the  ship,  that  all  was  in  read- 
iness. But  upon  attempting  to  return  the  salute,  tiie  officer  found  that  all 
was  not  quite  ready,  for  it  was  with  the  greatest  difllcuUy,  that  he  could 
succeed  in  discharging  ihe  rusty  gun,  but  he  did  finally  succeed,  and  thus, 
the  honor  of  the  nation  stands  unimpaired,  but  its  credit  is  mucii  impair- 
ed, for  the  powder  was  not  paid  for,  up  to  the  last  accounts.  From  the 
foregoing,  the  actual  military  strength,  of  California,  is  seen  to  be,  three 
hundred  and  nineteen  //i^ii«?i soldiers,  forty-seven  rush/  cannons,  and  no 
ammunition.  In  addition  to  the  military  force,  above  enumerated,  about 
six  or  seven  hundred  troops  might,  possibly,  be  raised  in  an  extreme  case, 
M'hich  would  make  the  entire  ibrce  of  this  country,  about  one  thousand 
Mexicans  troops.  The  soldiery  of  this  country,  like  that  of  all  other 
parts  of  Mexico,  consists  of  the  very  lowes:  order  of  Mexicans,  who  are, 
in  fact,  nothing  more  nor  less,  than  the  most  degraded  and  wretched,  of 
those  timid  and  inert  aborigines. 

The  missionary  stations  will  next,  receive  a  passing  notice,  which  \\\\\ 
consist,  merely  of  a  statement,  of  tiieir  number,  and  a  general  description 
of  them,  collectively.  In  all,  there  arc;  twenty  missionary  stations,  ten 
of  which,  are  very  valuable  in  lands,  horses,  cattle  and  vineyards,  the 
residue  of  which,  are  valuable  only  in  lands  and  vineyards.  These  are 
all,  extensive  establishments,  which  are  occupied  by  the  catholic  priests, 
and  others,  ostensibly  for  the  purpose  of  christianizing  the  Indians,  im- 
mense numbers  of  whom,  are  connected  with  each  station,  and  who  are 
under  the  absolute  control,  of  the  most  despotic  and  inhuman  priesthood. 
The  practical  effect  of  these  establishments  has,  tiuis  fiir,  been,  to  crowd  those 
vast  plains  and  valleys,  in  their  vicinity,  with  countless  herds  of  large,  fine 
catde,  horses  and  sheep,  to  plant  and  grow  extensive  vineyards,  ol'  tliose 
delicious  grapes,  and  to  erect  spacious,  and  palace -like  edifices,  for  the 
accommodation  of  those  religious  oppressors,  who  are  there  thought  to 
be,  the  authorized  keepers,  not  only  of  the  consciences  of  men,  but  also 
of  the  keys  of  both  heaven  and  hell.  A  further  effect  of  these  establish- 
ments has  been,  not  only  to  enslave  and  oppress,  thousands  of  these  tim- 
id and  unsuspecting  aborigines,  but  also  to  reduce  all  the  common,  and 
lower  orders,  of  the  people,  to  a  most  abject  state  of  vassalage,  and  to 
stamp  indellible  ignorance  and  superstition,  upon  their  imbecile  and  uncul- 
tivated minds.  In  order  to  show  more  fully,  the  vast  amount  of  menial 
servitude,  which  has  been,  from  time  to  time,  thus  forcibly  imposed  upon, 
the  various  weak  and  inofiensive  tribes  of  Indians,  whom  fortune,  or  rath- 
er misfortune,  has  thus  exposed,  to  the  absolute  despotism,  of  a  monarchal 
13 


106  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

priesthood,  I  will  here,  give  a  brief  exhibit,  of  the  extraordinary  wealth 
and  power,  of  these  very  devoted  and  praiseworthy  religious  instructors. 
At  many  of  the  different  stations,  they  frequently  have  from  five,  to  fif- 
teen thousand  head  of  horses,  and  from  ten,  to  thirty  thousand  head  of 
cattle,  besides  many  thousands  of  sheep,  and  hundreds  of  hogs,  all  of 
which,  are  reared  by  those  Indians,  most  of  whom,  have  been  dragged, 
forcibly  into  their  service.  So  numerous  are  the  herds,  reared  at  many 
of  these  stations,  and  so  little  do  these  profligate  priests,  regard  the  toil 
and  labor,  which  their  rearing  has  cost  the  poor,  and  oppressed  natives, 
that  they  have,  in  many  instances,  required  the  Indians  to  kill  many  thou- 
sands of  them,  merely  for  their  hides.  I  was  informed  by  several  respec- 
spectable  foreigners,  that  there  was  an  instance,  but  a  few  years 
since,  of  one  of  those  priests'  causing  twenty  thousand  head,  of  large, 
fine  cattle  to  be  killed  for  the  hides  only,  leaving  their  tallow  and  beef,  at 
the  disposal  of  the  various  carnivorous  animals,  which  there  abound,  in 
countless  numbers.  In  connection  with  most  of  these  stations,  there  are 
also,  large  vineyards,  containing  from  five  to  fifteen  acres  of  thrifty  vines, 
producing  a  superabundance  of  large  and  delicious  grapes,  from  which 
vast  quantities  of  the  most  excellent  wine  are  extracted,  and  always  kept 
on  hand,  for  the  use  and  benefit,  of  the  more  than  regal  priesthood. 
Buildings  of  various  kinds  are,  erected  in  connection  with  each  of  these 
stations,  among  which,  are  not  only  the  magnificent  residences  of  the 
priests,  but  also  all  other  buildings,  the  erection  of  which,  either  the 
convenience  or  the  pride  of  the  priests,  happens  to  suggest.  Among  those, 
the  erection  of  which,  is  suggested  by  their  pride,  are  of  course,  many 
magnificent,  and  vastly  expensive  churches,  which  are  well  supplied 
with  golden  images,  which  are  held  by  many,  as  the  mere  insignia  of  the 
Divine  presence,  while  many  others,  who  are  the  more  ignorant,  view 
them  not  as  mere  images,  but  as  so  many  Gods  in  reality.  It  is  estima- 
ted, that  the  entire  wealth,  of  all  these  missionary  settlements,  including 
the  herds  and  lands,  together  with  all  the  various  improvements,  amounts 
to  about  four  hundred  thousand  dollars,  which  immense  amount,  has  been 
extracted,  either  from  the  helpless  and  defenceless  aborigines,  in  forced 
labor,  or  from  the  ignorant  and  superstitious  Mexicans,  in  the  exaction  of 
unholy  tithes. 

There  have  been  numerous  mstances,  of  those  missionary  gen,'- 
eraVs,  having  armed  companies,  of  Mexicans  and  subdued  Indians,  whom 
they  have  sent  out,  for  the  purpose  of  dragging  the  defenceless,  naked 
natives  to  the  missions,  with  no  other  view,  than  that  of  enslaving  them, 
but  ostensible  M'ith  the  laudible  view  of  christianizing  them,  which,  by 
the  by,  affords  them  a  very  plausible  pretext,  for  the  accomplishment  of 
their  inhuman  purposes.  These  companies  meeting  with  the  least  resis- 
tance, have,  frequendy,  fired  upon  their  unoffending  victims,  and  slain 
them  by  scores,  and  thus,  in  the  extreme  anxiety  of  these  priests,  in  ref- 
erence to  the  future  welfare,  of  these  poor  and  benighted  beings,  and  in 
their  most  divine  and  christian  determination,  to  save  human  souls,  they, 
as  far  as  they  have  the  power,  destroy  both  soul  and  body.  To  quiet  the 
consciences  of  these  bloody  tyrants,  religion  is  brought  to  their  aid.  They 
insist,  that,  notwithstanding  all  the  apparent  oppression,  outrage  and 
death,  which  they  are  daily  inflicting  upon  the  natives,  yet  it  is  a  great 
blessing  to  them,  for  the  sooner  the  finally  obstinate  are  cut  off,  the 
better  for  them,   as   their  longer   continuance   on   earth,   only  enhan- 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  107 

ces  their  guilt  here,  and  increases  their  punishment  hereafter;  and  the 
converted  are  paid,  more  than  a  hundred  fold,  for  all  their  sufferings  and 
deprivations,  by  being  permitted  to  share  the  never-ending  joys  of  heaven, 
with  their  cruel  oppressors.  These  are  some  of  the  many  blessings,  re- 
sulting to  those  whom  they  convert;  and  they  do  really  convert  them, 
but  not  to  Christianity ;  they  convert  them  to  their  owri  use ;  a  clear  case 
of  trover  and  conversion.  These  flagrant  oppressions  are  not  confined  to 
the  Indians,  but  they  are  extended,  in  a  greater  or  less  extent,  to  all  the 
Mexicans,  which  may  be  seen,  from  an  occurrence  which  I  will  now  re- 
late. Upon  the  decease  of  a  very  elderly,  and  extremely  wealthy  farmer, 
in  the  northern  part  of  California,  the  priests  applied  to  the  heirs,  for  an 
appropriate  dividend  of  the  property  of  the  deceased,  which  was  one 
tenth  of  the  entire  estate.  The  deceased  had  for  several  years,  refused 
to  pay  tithes  to  the  priest,  and  his  heirs  followed  his  example,  and  also  re- 
fused to  pay  the  tithes,  because  of  which,  the  priests  became  so  highly 
•offended,  that  they  refused  absolutely,  to  perform  the  ordinary  religious 
rites,  or  to  permit  the  friends  of  the  deceased,  to  inter  the  corpse  within 
the  consecrated  grounds.  According  to  the  superstitions,  of  these  people, 
to  inter  the  corpse  elsewhere,  and  especially,  "  without  the  benefit  of  the 
clergy,"  would  be  tantamount,  not  only  to  excluding  the  spirit  of  the  de- 
ceased, from  the  joys  of  heaven,  but  also,  to  heaping  upon  it,  all  of  the 
woes  of  hell.  This  thought,  the  friends  of  the  deceased,  could  not, for  a 
moment,  endure,  consequently,  they  at  once,  proposed  to  pay  the  tithes, 
and  thereby,  secure  the  immediate  interment  of  the  body,  and  ultimate 
happiness  of  the  spirit  of  their  deceased  friend ;  but,  as  astonishing  as  it 
may  appear,  the  priests  now  refused  to  receive  a  tenth,  but  demanded  one 
fifth  of  all  the  property  of  the  decedent.  With  this  most  unreasonable, 
and  unjust  demand,  the  heirs  of  the  deceased,  of  course,  refused  to  com- 
ply, but  embalmed  and  preserved  the  body,  as  they  best  could,  until  they 
could  apply  to  the  governor,  who  was  then,  about  four  hundred  miles 
from  that  place.  A  courier  was  accordingly  dispatched,  to  the  residence 
of  the  governor,  where  he  arrived  in  a  few  days,  when  all  the  facts,  and 
attending  circumstances,  having  been  made  known  to  the  governor,  he 
immediately,  issued  his  edict,  requiring  the  priest,  who  resided  in  the 
neighborhood  of  the  deceased,  not  only  to  yield  his  assent,  to  the  inter- 
ment of  the  corpse,  in  the  consecrated  ground,  but  also, to  perform  the 
accustomed  saving  rites,  and  that  too,  in  his  own  proper  person.  This 
edict  reached  the  obstinate  divine,  in  a  very  few  days,  who  upon  receiving 
which, immediately,  though  very  reluctandy,  proceeded  to  the  discharge 
of  the  important  duty,  imposed  upon  him  by  the  governor.,  not  of  the  uni- 
verse, but  of  California,  Notwithstanding  three  weeks  had  elapsed, 
since  the  death  of  the  deceased,  the  burial  now  took  place,  within  the 
consecrated  grounds,  and  under  all  the  clerical  pomp  and  parade,  which 
.are  customary,  upon  such  occasions.  Thus  the  blessings  of  heaven  were 
secured;  the  woes  of  hell  averted;  the  heirs  were  permitted  to  retain, 
their  rightful  property  ;  and,  for  once,  the  priests  in  all  their  might,  were 
subjected  to  an  inglorious  defeat,  even  in  California.  The  Mexicans  are 
now  discovering  that  no  good,  but  much  evil  is  arising  from,  those  mis- 
sionary establishments,  consequently,  they  have  determined  to  convert 
them  to  their  own  use,  which  in  truth,  they  have  absolutely  done,  in  one 
or  two  instances.  A  large  majority,  of  all  the  Californians,  are  much  op- 
posed to  the  existence  of  these  institutions,  the  consequence  of  which, 


108  THE   EMIGRANTS'    GUIDE 

will  eventually  be,  that,  as  they  are  public  property,  they  will  be  made 
available,  and  converted  to  the  public  good,  golden  images  and  all.  This 
would, undoubtedly,  be  perfectly  right,  for  they  are  now,  nothing  more  nor 
less,  than  powerful  engines,  of  high-handed  oppression,  relenUess  cruelty, 
and  unremitting  sinfulness. 

There  are  but  five  towns  in  this  country,  all  of  which  are  situated  upon, 
or  in  the  vicinity  of  the  coast.  The  largest  of  these  is  called  Poabalo, 
which  is  situated  near  latitude  33  deg.  north,  a  few  miles  east  from  the 
coast.  It  contains  a  population,  of  about  fifteen  hundred,  consisting  chiefly 
of  Mexicans  and  Indians.  There  are  very  few  foreigners  at  this  place, 
even  fewer,  than  there  are  at  several  of  the  smaller  towns.  It  contains 
about  two  hundred  buildings,  which  are  small,  and  otherwise  inferior, 
the  walls  of  which,  are  generally,  constructed  of  "adobies;"  which  are 
large  dried  brick,  and  the  roofs  chiefly  of  tiles;  they  are  but  one  story 
high,  though  many  of  them,  are  very  convenient.  Although  this  town  is 
the  largest  found  in  this  country,  yet  from  the  fact  of  its  being  situated  in 
the  interior,  it  is  of  much  less  importance,  than  those  which  1  shall  sub- 
sequently describe.  In  point  of  population,  Monterey  is  the  second  town, 
but  from  its  situation  upon  the  bay  of  Monterey,  and  from  its  being  the 
seat  of  government,  it  is  a  much  more  important  town  than  any  other  in 
the  country.  It  is  situated  on  the  south  side,  of  the  bay  of  Monterey,  in 
full  view  of  the  ocean,  and  near  latitude  37  deg.  north,  containing  a  pop- 
ulation of  about  one  thousand,  which  consists,  principalh',  of  Mexicans 
and  Indians.  Including  those  within  its  suburbs,  it  contiiins  about  one 
hundred  buildings,  the  walls  of  which,  are  also  chi^^fly  constructed  of: 
"adobies,"  and  the  roofs  of  tile.  These  buildings,  like  those  of  Poabalo, 
are  also  very  cheaply  constructed,  and  are,  generally,  but  one  story  high,, 
yet  the  governor's  house,  and  those  of  several  of  the  foreigners,  are  ex- 
ceptions to  this;  that  of  the  governor,  especially,  is  rather  a  spacious  and. 
convenient  dwelling.  There  are  many  more  foreigners  at  this  place, 
than  at  any  other  town  in  the  country.  They  consist  of  Americans, 
Englishmen  and  Frenchmen,  but  they  are  chiefly  Americans.  This 
town  is  situated  upon  one  of  the  most  beautiful  sites  for  a  town,  or  even 
for  a  city,  that  I  have  ever  beheld;  being  a  gently  imdulating  plain,  with 
a  single,  small  pine  or  oak.  intersp'^rscd  here  and  there,  without  any  un- 
dergrowth, surrounded  by  a  vast  interior,  of  fertile  plains  and  valleys,^ 
and  in  full  view  of  rolling  billows,  and  the  lashing  surf,  of  that  unbound-' 
ed  ocean;  it  wears  a  most  picturesque  and  grand  appearance.  This  is,3 
in  all  respects,  a  most  delightful  and  favorable  site,  for  a  great  commercial 
emporium,  as  which  it  is  undoubtedly,  destiiiated  ultimately,  to  be  occU' 
pied.  The  third  town,  in  point  of  population,  is  Poabalo,  which  is  the 
same  name  as  that  given  the  first  town  mentioned;  they  arc  distinguished, 
however,  by  the  addition  of  above  and  below,  that  being  called  Poabalo 
below,  and  this  Poabalo  above.  It  is  situated  about  four  leagues  from 
the  coast,  north  northeast  from  Monterey,  and  near  latitude  37  deg.  and 
20  min.  north.  Including  Mexicans,  Indians  and  foreigners,  it  has  a 
population,  of  about  five  hundred,  which  consists,chiefly,  of  Mexicans  and 
Indians.  There  are  fewer  foreigners  at  this  town,  than  at  any  other  in 
the  country,  in  proportion  to  the  population,  unless,  perhaps,  there  may 
be  fewer  at  Poabalo  below.  The  buildings  of  this  town,  like  those  of 
Monterey  and  Poabalo  below,  are  small,  and  cheaply  constructed,  the 
walls  of  which,  are  of  "adobies,"  and  the  roofs  of  tiles.     In  all,  there  are 


■T- 
TO    OREGON    AND    CALIFORNIA,  109 

about  seventy  buildings,  among  which,  there  are  a  few  framed  dwelling- 
houses,  which  are  chiefly  situated  in  the  suburbs,  and  are  principally 
owned  by  foreigners. 

I'he  only  towns  remaining  to  be  noticed,  are  Yerba  Buena  and  Sono- 
ma, the  former  of  which,  is  the  fourth  town  in  reference  to  its  population, 
but  it  is  the  second,  if  not  the  first,  in  point  of  local  positiou.  Yerba  Bu- 
ena is  the  Spanish  name,  given  this  place,  which  signifies,  in  the  English 
language,  good  herb,  and  which  was  given  it,  because  of  a  certain  herb's 
growing,  in  great  abundance,  in  its  vicinity.  This  place,  however,  among 
3ie  foreigners,  has  always  borne  the  name  of  St.  Francisco,  which  name, 
it  will  be  most  likely,  to  retain.  It  is  located  on  the  north  side,  of  the 
bay  of  St.  Francisco,  about  two  miles  from  the  entrance  of  that  bay,  near 
latitude  38  deg.  north,  containing  a  population  of  about  two  hundred, 
which  consists  of  Mexicans  and  Indians,  but  there  are  more  foreigners  at 
this  place,  than  at  any  other  town  in  the  country,  in  proportion  to  the 
population.  It  contains  about  fifty  buildings,  which,  unlike  those  of  the 
other  towns  enumerated,  are,  chiefly,  wooden  buildings,  which  is  owing 
to  the  fact  of  their  having  been  built,  by  the  foreigners.  This  is  a  very 
delightful  site  for  a  town,  but  it  is  rather  limited  in  extent,  it  being  but 
about  eighty  rods,  from  the  bay,  to  the  base  of  the  range  of  hills,  which 
lie  between  it  and  the  ocean.  That  portion  of  the  site  which  lies  between 
the  bay  and  the  hills,  is  a  beautiful,  giadually  undulating  plain,  immedi- 
ately in  front  of  which,  is  an  e.xlensive  and  safe  harbor,  in  which  hun- 
dreds of  ships,  of  the  largest  class,  may  ride  in  perfect  safety.  This  situ- 
ation, although  limited,  may  very  easily  be  extended,  to  a  sufficient  ex- 
tent, with  the  trivial  expense,  of  a  few  excavations  and  other  improve- 
ments. The  extensive  and  secure  anchorage,  in  the  vicinity  of  this  situ- 
ation, as  well  as  its  proximity  to  the  entrance,  and  to  the  coast,  has  thus 
far,  given  it  the  preference,  to  the  numerous  other  sites,  which  are  found 
at  various  points,  upon  this  great  bay.  The  most  extensive  and  secure 
anchorage,  is  to  be  found,  in  almost  every  portion  of  this  bay,  in  connec- 
tion with  which,  are  numerous  situations  for  towns  and  cities,  which  are 
of  large  extent,  and  extraordinary  beauty.  In  view  of  these  considera- 
lions,  I  am  inclined  to  the  belief,  that  some  other  point,  which  is  more 
advantageously  situated,  and  more  extensive,  will,  eventually,  be  selected 
as  the  situation,  of  that  great  commercial  emporium,  which  is,  beyond  a 
doubt,  destined,  at  no  distant  period,  to  be  reared  up,  at  some  point  upon 
that  great  inland  sea.  The  importance  of  the  site  upon  which  Yerba 
Buena  is  situated,  must  readily  be  seen,  for  although,  it  is  not  the  most 
eligible  site,  which  may  be  found  upon  that  bay,  yet,  as  it  is  the  first 
town  commenced  in  that  vicinity,  it  may,  for  that  reason  alone,  acquire  a 
lasting  preference,  over  all  other,  even  more  favorable  situations.  The 
Hudson''s  Bay  Company  having  seen,  the  superior  importance,  of  that 
section  of  country,  located  at  that  place,  at  an  early  day,  where  it  now 
has  an  extensive  trading  establishment,  at  vi'hi.ch,  a  very  extensive  trade, 
is  now  carried  on,  both  with  the  Mexicans  and  the  foreigners.  The  gen- 
tleman in  charge  of  that  establishment,  is  Mr.  Raye,  who  is  not  only  a 
very  intelligent  bnsiness  man,  but  also  an  honorable,  kind  and  hospitable 
gentleman.  He  receives  and  entertains  foreigners  with  the  utmost  kind- 
ness and  attention  and  without  regard  to  their  national  origin,  his  unre- 
ijiitting  attentions  are  bestowed  upon  them,  while  they  remain  at  Yerba 
BuQtia;  and  even  when  they  take  their  departure,  this  gentleman  is  seep 


110  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

waving  his  hat,  in  tokens  of  kind  remembrance,  and  lasting  friendship, 
Sonoma  is  the  only  town,  which  remains  unnoticed,  and  which  is  situated 
on  the  north  side  of  the  bay  of  St.  Francisco,  near  latitude  38  deg.  and 
20  min.  north.  It  contains  about  twenty  wooden  and  "adobie"  buildings, 
with  a  population  of  about  one  hundred,  consisting  of  Mexicans  and  In- 
dians. The  site  occupied  by  this  place,  is  a  most  beautiful  and  fertile, 
though  small  valley,  m  some  part  of  which,  there  will,  most  likely,  event- 
ually  be  a  town  of  some  considerable  importance. 

The  principal  settlements,  which  are  disconnected  with  the  forts,  mis- 
sions and  towns,  are  chiefly  within  ten  or  twelve  leagues  of  the  coast, 
with  the  exception  of  those  upon,  and  in  the  immediate  vicinity,  of  the 
Sacramento,  which  are  from  ten  to  fifty  leagues  from  the  coast,  and  which 

are  the  most  extensive  of  all  the  interior  settlements  of  California. 

These  settlements  are  made  up,  almost  entirely,  of  foreigners,  and  chiefly, 
of  Americans,  consisting  of  about  two  hiwidred  persons,  thirty-three  of 
whom,  arrived  with  me,  in  that  country,  in  the  autumn  of  1843,  but  the 
greater  portion  of  them,  had  resided  there  for  several  years  previous. 
They  all  have  fine  herds  of  cattle  and  horses,  with  farms,  under  a  good 
state  of  cultivation,  upon  which,  they  grow  a  great  abundance  of  wheat, 
corn,  oats  and  flax,  as  well  as  a  great  variety  and  superabundance  of 
vegetables,  and  that  too,  with  very  little  labor  or  expense.  Many  of  these 
settlers  are  in  very  prosperous  circumstances,  and  they  are  all  doing  ex- 
tremely well,  considering  the  very  short  period,  of  their  residence  in 
that  country.  They  usually  sow  annually,  several  hundred  acres  of 
wheat,  from  which  they  are  not  only  able  to  supply  themselves,  but  also 
to  supply  all  the  emigrants  who  are  annually  arriving,  as  well  as  to  fur- 
nish much  for  exportation.  All  the  farmers,  throughout  the  diflferent 
portions  of  the  country,  are  succeeding  extremely  well ;  they  all  grow 
considerable  grain,  and  especially  wheat,  but  they  devote  their  chief  at- 
tention to  the  rearing  of  cattle,  horses,  and  sheep.  As  has  been  before 
stated,  many  of  them  have,  as  many  as  fifteen  or  twenty  thousand  head 
of  cattle,  and  as  many  horses,  and  from  five  to  fifteen  hundred  sheep. 
The  foreigners  here,  conduct  their  agricultural  labors,  very  much  as  they 
do  in  the  states,  but,  their  improvements  are  materially  different ;  they 
very  seldom  construct  rail  fences,  as  they  find  it  is  less  expensive,'to  in- 
close their  lands  by  ditches,  or  to  employ  a  few  Indians  to  guard  their 
crops,  until  they  are  matured  and  harvested.  Crops  are  thus  very  easily 
protected,  as  the  country  is  but  sparsedly  settled,  and  as  the  plains  and 
valleys,  everywhere  abound,  with  oats  and  clover,  so  that  there  is  very 
little  inducement,  for  the  various  herds  to  intrude  upon  the  cultivated 
lands.  In  the  present  thinly  settled  state  of  the  country,  an  Indian  will 
efl^ectually  guard,  a  hundred  acres;  hence  crops  are  protected,in  this  man- 
ner, with  much  less  expense,  than  they  could  be  by  fencing.  Fencing, 
by  ditching,  is  attended  with  much  less  expense,  than  fencing  in  the  ordi- 
nary manner,  not  because  timber  cannot  be  obtained,  but  because  the  In- 
dians perform  all  labor  of  that  kind,  with  much  expertness,  and  because 
they  are  entirely  unacquainted  with  the  business  of  making  rails.  The 
buildings,  upon  the  various  farms,  here  and  throughout  all  the  interior 
like  those  in  the  towns,  are,  chiefly,  of  "adobies,"  which  are  found,  by 
experience,  to  make  much  the  best  buildings.  These  buildings  are  pre- 
ferred for  various  reasons ;  they  are  much  less  expensive,  and  they  are 
much  cooler,  and  more  pleasant  in  the  summer,  and  warmer  in  winter, 


TO    OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  Ill 

than  either  those  made  of  stone,  the  ordinary  brick,  or  of  wood.  But  the 
chief  circumstance,  which  gives  them  the  preference,  is  that  the  Indians 
are  able  to  perform  all  the  labor,  in  their  construction.  The  roofs  are 
either  of  tiles  or  shingles,  and  the  first  floors  are,  generally,  of  "adobies," 
of  the  same  size  and  kind,  as  those  of  which  the  v/alls  are  constructed. 
The  farmers  find  all  the  materials,  for  this  kind  of  buildings,  wherever 
they  wish  to  build,  and  by  calling  a  few  Indians  to  their  aid,  they  are 
able,  at  any  time,  to  complete  a  very  comfortable  building,  of  this  kind, 
in  a  very  few  days.  This  species  of  building,  is  thought  to  be  equally 
as  permanent  and  durable,  as  either  those  constructed  of  brick  or  stone, 
especially  in  a  climate  of  so  very  little  rain,  and  of  such  extTaoidinary 
dryness  and  aridity.  The  same  kinds  of  buildings,  I  find,  are  used,  in  all 
the  southern  portion  of  Mexico,  where  they  are  much  preferred,  and  for 
the  same  reason,  that  they  are  here  preferred. 

All  of  these  settlements,  as  well  as  those  connected  with  the  forts,  missions 
and  towns,  are  supplied  with  all  the  means  of  subsistence  within  themselves; 
they  not  only  rear  their  own  herds,  grow  their  own  grain  and  vegetables, 
but  they  also  make  their  own  cloth;  and  they  are  all  supplied  with  flouring- 
mills,  which  answer  all  the  purposes  of  each  settlement.  These  mills  are 
either  horse-mills  or  wind-mills,  yet  they  are  found  to  answer  all  useful 
purposes,  of  all  the  diflferenl  settlements,  forts,  missions  and  towns.  These 
are  the  only  kinds  of  flouring-mills,-  in  the  country,  as  yet,  but  a  steam 
flouring-mill  was  in  contemplation,  and  in  truth,  it  was  commenced,  and 
in  a  forward  state  of  progression  when  I  left  that  country  Lumber  is 
generally  sawed  by  hand,  as  there  are  but  few  saw-mills,  as  yet,  in  the 
country.  There  were  but  two  saw-mills  in  operation  in  the  autumn  of 
1843,  one  of  which  was  owned  by  a  Mr.  Graham,  and  the  other  by  a 
Mr.  Yunt,  both  of  which  gentlemen,  are  countrymen  of  ours.  Besides 
these,  there  was  also  a  steam  saw-mill,  which  was  then,  recently  com- 
menced, by  a  Capt.  Smith,  who  is  the  proprietor  of  the  steam  flouring- 
mill,  before  alluded  to,  and  who  is  also  a  countryman  of  ours.  Both  of 
these  mills  were  in  a  state  of  completion,  when  I  left  that  country,  the 
frimes  and  other  wooden  work,  were  very  nearly  finished ;  the  engine, 
and  other  machinery  had  been  received,  and  were  being  erected.  It  was 
thought  that  both  of  these  mills,  would  be  fully  completed,  by  the  first  of 
January  1843,  at  farthest.  These  mills  are  being  erected  at  Bodaga, 
which  has  been  before  described,  and  which  is  a  very  favorable  position, 
for  machinery  of  that  kind,  especially,  for  a  saw-mill,  as  the  whole  sur- 
rounding country,  abounds  with  the  most  admirable  timber,  for  lumber  and 
ship-building.  Here  I  will  take  occasion  to  remark,  that  the  reason  of 
machineries'  not  being  established,  in  this  country,  to  a  greater  extent,  is 
not  that  there  is  not  a  sufiicient  number  of  sites,  favorable  for  that  pur- 
pose, for  there  are  very  few  portions  of  the  country,  but  that  abound  with 
the  most  eligible  sites,  for  extensive  machinery  of  any  kind.  Many  of 
those  portions  of  the  country,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  different  bays,  and 
of  the  coast  generally,  as  well  as  those  portions  far  in  the  interior,  afljord 
numerous  favorable  situations,  for  extensive  machinery.  The  only  cause 
of  machineries'  having  been  introduced  to  so  limited  an  extent,  are,  that 
the  very  sparce  settlement,  and  the  general  inattention  to  the  industrial 
pursuits,  v/ould  not,  heretofore,  have  warranted  sucli  expensive  enterpri- 
ses, and  that,  foreigners  of  that  sterling  enterprise,  requsite  to  develope 
the  resources  of  that  delightful  country,  have  not,  until  quite  recently, 


112  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

turned  their  attention  to  that  remote  region.  But  now,  a  different  state 
of  things  exists;  a  new  era  in  the  improvements  of  Calafornia  has  corn- 
uienced ;  here  as  in  Oregon,  foreigners  from  all  countries,  of  the  most 
enterprising  and  energetic  character,  are  annually  arriving,  selecting  and 
improving  the  most  favorable  sites  for  towns,  and  selecting  and  securing 
extensive  grants  of  land,  in  the  most  desirable  portions  of  the  country. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

A  DESCRIPTION  OF  CALIFORNIA. 

'The  popidation;  amount  of;  consisting  of  foreigners,  Mexicans,  and  In- 
dians. Foreigners;  number  of;  where  located;  pecidiar  character  of; 
unanimity  and  harmony  existing  among.  Mexicans;  number  of;  diffeV' 
ent  classes  of;  their  character.  Character  of  the  priests;  anecdotes  in  ref- 
erence  to,  Indians;  number  of;  description  of.  Govenrment;  form  of. 
Micheltorena.^  present  governor.  Revolution  of  1836.  Alvar ado  declared 
governor.  Echuandra  deposed.  II evolutionary  act  ratified,  by  Mexico; 
cause  of.  Alvarado  viola! es  his  faith.  Oppression  of  foreigner's;  im^ 
prisonment  of;  e.rtrHme  suffering  <f  Forty  foreigners  sent  in  irons,  to  the 
City  of  Me.vico;  their  release.  Neglect  of  our  government.  Alvarado 
deposed.,  and  disgraced.  Arrival  of  Michdtorena',  his  troops  ;  number  of; 
description  of ;  their  bravery.  The  judiciary  ;  simplicity  of.  Alcaldes; 
their  duties.  Passports ;  f)r  what  purpose  issued. ;  not  indespensable. 
Officers  less  strict  with  foreigners  latterly,  than  formerly ;  cause  of;  an- 
other cause  of.  Inducements  to  emigrants ;  grants  of  land  given ;  e.vlent 
of;  how  applied  for;  prere(pii.sites.  Opinion  of  Me:rican  functionary, 
opposed  to  facts.     Impolicy  of  creating  distinctions  between  citizen. 

The  entire  population  of  Upper  Cilifornia,  including  foreigners,  Mex- 
icans and  Indians,  may  be  estimated  at  about  thirty-one  thousand  human 
souls,  of  whom,  about  one  thousand  are  foreigners,  ten  thousand  are  Mex- 
icans, and  the  residue  are  Indians.  By  the  term  foreigners,  I  include  all 
those  who  are  not  native  citizens  of  Mexico,  whether  they  have  become 
citizens  by  naturalization,  or  whether  they  remain  in  a  state  of  alienage. 
They  consist,  chiefly,  of  Americans,  Englishmen,  Frenchmen,  Germans 
and  Spaniards,  but  there  is  a  very  large  majority  of  the  former.  The 
foreigners  are  principally  settled  at  the  various  towns,  and  upon  the  Sa- 
cramento ;  those  of  whom  who,  are  located  at  the  latter  place,  consist 
almost  entirely  of  our  own  citizens.  The  foreigners  of  this  country  are, 
generally'-,  very  intelligent;  many  of  them  have  received  all  the  advan- 
tages of  an  education  ;  and  they  all  possess  an  unusual  degree  of  industry 
and  enterprise.  Those  who  are  emigrating  to  that  remote  and  almost 
unknown  region,  like  those  who  are  emigrating  to  Oregon,  are,  in.  all 
respects,  a  different  class  of  persons,  from  those  who  usually  emigrate  to 
our  frontier.  They  generally,  possess  more  than  an  ordinary  degree  of 
mtelligencCj  and  that  they  possess  an  eminent  degree  of  industry,  enter 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  113 

prise  and  bravery,  is  most  clearly  evinced,  from  th^  very  fact,  of  their  en- 
tering- upon  this  most  arduous  and  perilous  undertaking.  Very  few  cow- 
ards ever  venture  voluntarily,  to  meet  all  those  imaginary  and  real  dan- 
gers, to  which  they  are  necessarily  exposed,  in  crossing  the  Rocky  moun- 
tains or  doubling  Cape  Horn ;  and  no  indolent  man,  even  if  he  possess  the  \ 
bravery  of  Caesar,  can  ever  summon  the  requisite  energy ;  and  if  he  \ 
possess  the  bravery  of  CaBsar,  and  the  strength  and  energy  of  Hercules,  \ 
and  lack  the  enterprise,  he  will  have  no  disposition  to  attempt  a  feat,jso  \ 
arduous  and  irksome.  Hence,  if  he  possess  an  unusual  degree  of  cow- 
ardice, he  dare  not,  if  nature  has  supplied  him  with  a  great  competency 
of  indolence,  he  cannot ;  and  if  he  be  not  blessed  with  more  than  an  or- 
dinary share  of  energy  and  enterprise,  he  will  not  emigrate,  either  to 
Oregon  or  California.  The  above  gives  some  of  the  leading  traits  of 
character,  of  the  foreigners  of  California,  but  extraordinary  kindness, 
courtesy  and  hospitality,  are  additional  traits,  which  they  possess  to  an 
anusual  degree.  A  more  kind  and  hospitable  people  are  nowhere  found; 
they  seem  to  vie  with  each  other,  in  their  kindness  and  hospitality  to 
strangers ;  and  at  the  same  time,  they  treat  each  other  as  brothers.  Here, 
you  see  the  citizens  and  subjects,  of  almost  every  nation  in  the  civilized 
World,  united  by  the  silken  chains  of  friendship,  exerting  every  energy, 
and  doing  every  thing  in  their  power,  to  promote  the  individual  and  gen- 
eral welfare.  Upon  the  arrival  of  a  stranger  among  them,  the  question 
is  not,  is  he  an  Englishman,  an  American  or  Frenchman,  but  is  he  a 
foreigner?  which  latter,  if  he  is  found  to  be,  he  receives  all  that  kindness 
and  hospitable  attention,  peculiar  to  the  foreigners  of  California.  These  are 
truly  a  happy  people  ;  among  whom,  no  distinction  of  clime  is  recognized, 
national  preferences  and  prejudices  do  not  exist,  religious  rancor  is  hush- 
ed ;  and  all  is  order,  harmony  and  peace.  The  sages  of  by-gone  days, 
sighed  for  such  scenes  as  here  exist,  but  they  realized  them  not;  the 
children  of  fancy,  dreamed  their  dreams  of  union  and  harmony,  but  the 
foreigners  of  California,  enjoy  their  desired  realities. 

The  Mexicans  diflfcr,  in  every  particular,  from  the  foreigners;  ignorance 
and  its  concomitant,  superstition,  together  with  suspicion  and  supercil- 
iousness, constitute  the  chief  ingredients,  of  the  Mexican  character.  More 
indomitable  ignorance  does  not  prevail,  among  any  people  who  make  the 
least  pretentions  to  civilization  ;  in  truth,  they  are  scarcely  a  visible  grade, 
in  the  scale  of  intelligence,  above  the  barbarous  tribes  by  whom  they  are 
surrounded  ;  but  this  is  not  surprising,  especially  when  we  consider  the 
relation,  which  these  people  occupy  to  their  barbarous  neighbors,  in  other 
particulars.  Many  of  the  lower  order  of  them,  have  intermarried  with 
the  various  tribes,  and  have  resided  with  them  so  long,  and  lived  in  a 
manner  so  entirely  similar,  that  it  has  become  almost  impossible,  to  trace 
the  least  distinctions  between  them,  either  in  reference  to  intelligence,  or 
complexion.  There  is  another  class,  which  is,  if  possible,  of  a  lower  or- 
der still,  than  those  just  alluded  to,  and  which  consists  of  the  aborigines 
themselves,  who  have  been  slightly  civilized,  or  rather  domesticated. 
These  two  classes  constitute  almost  the  entire  Mexican  population,  of 
California,  and  among  them  almost  every  variety  and  shade  of  complex- 
ion may  be  found,  from  the  African  black,  to  the  tawny  brown  of  our 
southern  Indians.  Although  there  is  a  great  variety,  and  dissimilarity 
among  them,  in  reference  to  their  complexions,  yet  in  their  beastly  habits 
14 


114  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

and  an  entire  want  of  all  moral  principle,  as  well  as  a  perfect  destitulioj> 
of  all  intelligence,  there  appears  to  be  a  perfect  similarity.  A  more  full 
description  of  these  classes,  will  be  found,  in  what  is  said,  in  reference 
to  the  Indians,  for  as  most  of  the  lower  order  of  Mexicans,  are  Indians  in 
fact,  whatever  is  said  in  reference  to  the  one,  will  also  be  applicable  to  the 
other.  The  higher  order  of  the  Mexicans,  in  point  of  intelligence,  are- 
perhaps  about  equal,  to  the  lower  order  of  our  citizens,  throughout  our 
western  states;  but  anfiong  these  even,  are  very  few,  who  are,  to  any  ex- 
tent, learned  or  even  intelligent.  Learning  and  intelligence  appear  to  be 
confined,  almost  entirely,  to  the  priests,  who  are,  generally,  both  learned 
r^nd  intelligent.  The  priests  are  not  only  the  sole  proprietors,  of  the  learn- 
ing and  intelligence,  but  also,  of  the  liberty  and  happiness  of  the  people, 
all  of  which  they  parcel  out  to  their  blind  votaries,  with  a  very  sparing 
hand ;  and  thus  it  is,  that  all  the  Mexican  people  are  kept,  in  this  state  of 
degrading  ignorance,  and  humiliating  vassalage.  The  priests  here,  not 
only  have  the  possession  of  the  keys  of  the  understanding,  and  the  door 
of  liberty,  but  they  also,  have  both  the  present  and  ultimate  happiness,  of 
.these  ignorant  people,  entirely  at  their  disposal.  Such  at  least,  is  the  be- 
lief of  the  people,  and  such  are  the  doctrines  there  taught  by  the  priests. 
At  times,  I  sympathize  with  these  unfortunate  beings,  but  again,  I  fre- 
quently think,  that,  perhaps,  it  is  fortunate  for  the  residue  of  m.ankind, 
that  these  semi-barbarians,  are  thus  ridden  and  restrained,  and  if  they  are 
to  be  thus  priest  ridden,  it  is,  no  doubt,  preferable,  that  they  should  retain 
their  present  riders. 

Notwithstanding  the  general  learning  of  the  priests,  they  are  the  most 
dissolute  and  abandoned  characters  of  the  whole  communhy.  They  in- 
dulge, without  restraint,  in  all  the  vices  common  to  those  people,  ana,  es- 
pecially, in  those  of  drunkenness  and  gambling.  To  such  an  extent  do 
they  indulge  in  the  former  of  these  vices,  that  it  is  not  unusual,  to  see 
them  so  much  intoxicated,  as  to  prevent  the  discharge  of  their  ordinary 
religious  duties.  It  may  not  be  inappropriate  here,  to  give  one  or  two 
instances,  which  were  related  to  me  by  respectable  gentlemen,  in  Cali- 
fornia, and  which,  may  show,  to  what  extent,  those  priests,  indulge  in 
these  vices.  One  Sabbath  morning,  as  my  informant  was  passing  along 
the  street,  in  one  of  those  towns,  he  observed  a  priest  standing  at  the  coun- 
ter of  a  grocery,  and  in  the  act  of  satiating  his  artificial  appetite,-  not  v;ith 
the  delicious  wine  of  California,  but  the  inebriating  brandy  of  the  states, 
of  which,  he  seemed  already,  to  have  received  a  surcharge,  for  his  de- 
ranged system,  appeared  to  be  almost  entirely,  beyond  his  control.  By  a 
fast  hold  upon  the  counter,  however,  he  was  enabled  to  hold  his  position, 
but  not  to  change  it,  though  the  latter  appeared  to  be  an  object,  which  he 
had  a  very  great  anxiety  to  accomplish.  Finally,  a  lad,  who  was  evi- 
dently in  search  of  the  priest,  was  seen  passing  from  grocery  to  grocery, 
until  he  fell  in  with  the  object  of  his  search,  our  hero,  when  he  informed 
him,  that  the  people  were  in  attendance,  at  the  church,  waiting  his  ar- 
rival, to  which  the  priest  replied,  that  it  was  very  well,  he  would  go,  so 
saying,  he  took  another  glass  of  brandy,  when,  with  the  aid  of  the  boy, 
he  staggered  on  church-ward,  with  more  than  ordinary  rapidity,  as  he 
had,  by  this  time,  ample  propelling  pov/er.  But  his  movements  were 
very  irregular,  v.-hich  was  very  much  owing  to  the  inadequacy  of  the 
power,  at  the  helm,  which  was  the  small  lad,  despite  of  all  whose  powers, 
he  frequently  made  the  most  tremendous  leaps  and  plunges,  which  ap- 


TO    OREGON   AND   CALIFORNIA.  115 

peared  to  threaten  an  immediate  wreck.  By  the  aid  of  the  helmsman, 
however,  and  the  gradual  diminution  of  the  propelling-  power,  that  awful 
calamity  was  averted,  and  this  great  crafty  was  safely  moored  in  the  de- 
sired haven,  amid  the  shouts  of  the  multitude,  and  to  the  infinite  joy  and 
gratification  of  the  whole  crew.  Whether  this  was  the  last  voyage,  my 
informant  was  not  advised,  but  that  it  was  not  the  first,  he  was  fully  ad-, 
vised,  for  he  had  witnessed  several  similar  arrivals  and  departures,  in 
person. 

When  I  shall  have  related  one  other  instance  of  this  kind,  I  will 
have  done  with  this  class  of  the  Californians.  The  instance  to  which  I 
allude,  was  related  to  me,  in  substance,  by  a  respectable  foreigner,  of  that 
country,  who  witnessed  th^  whole  occurrence,  as  here  related.  As  my 
informant  was  passing  in  the  street,  of  one  of  those  towns,  his  attention 
was  attracted  to  a  gambling  house,  upon  entering  which,  he  saw  four  or 
five  gentlemen  engaged  at  a  game  of  cards,  among  whom,  were  several 
officers  of  the  government,  and  other  gentlemen  of  standing,  as  well  as  a 
vfery  devoted  and  learned  priest,  who  appeared  to  be  much  interested  in 
the  game,  and  very  much  excited,  not  only  from  the  efi^ects  of  large  betting, 
but  also  from  the  effects  of  large  drinking.  V/hile  my  informant  remain- 
ed in  the  room,  which  was  about  thirty  minutes,  he  saw  this  religious 
personage,  bet  and  stake,  not  less  than  one  hundred  dollars,  and  drink 
not  less  than  three  glasses  of  brandy.  My  informant  now  left  these  high 
dignitaries,  about  "half  seas  over,"  excepting  the  priest,  who  appeared 
not  to  deal  in  halves  ;  he  did  not  appear  willing  to  bet  half  of  a  hundred, 
to  drink  half  of  a  glass  of  brandy,  nor  did  he  appear  willing  to  be  half 
drunk,  for  he  was  more  than  two  thirds  drunk.  Very  early  the  next 
morning,  my  informant  passed  the  door  of  the  same  establishment,  when, 
upon  hearing  unusual  confusion,  he  again  stepped  in,  and  to  his  utter  as- 
tonishment, he  found  the  same  gentlemen  in  the  same  condition  as  that 
in  which  he  left  them  the  evening  previous,  with  the  exception  of  an  in- 
crease of  their  numbers  and  their  excitement,  the  latter  of  v^^hich,  was 
strongly  indicated,  by  their  boisterous  and  angry  declamations,  as  well  as 
the  thunderings  of  their  repeated  stamping  upon  the  floor,  and  their  suc- 
cessive furious  blows  upon  the  table.  A  further  difference,  hov/ever,  Vv'as, 
that  the  floor  was  strewed  with  the  victims  both  of  Morpheus  and  Bac- 
chus, amongst  whom,  were  two  priests.  But  our  hero,  who  seemed  to 
take  every  thing  by  the  entirety,  had  taken  the  whole  night,  and  appeared 
inclined  to  take  the  whole  day;  he  was  now  in  high  glee,  and  was  evi- 
dently triumphing  over  the  fallen  victim.s  with  whom  he  was  surrounded. 
He  had  out-drunk,  out-gambled,  out-generaled  and  out-iuggled  them  all. 
As  any  new  or  interesting  circumstance  occurred,  he  was  IVequently  heard 
to  exclaim,  in  a  jocular  way,  "qod  est  in  corde  sobrii,estin  ore  cbrii," 
what  soberness  conceals,  drunkenness  reveals.  In  the  midst  of  this  high 
glee,  and  this  learned  display,  a  servant  appeared,  wlio  informed  the 
learned  divine,  that  his  attendance  was  now  required  at  the  church,  wliere 
the  people  had  already  convened.  The  learned,  polite  and  drunken  di- 
vine, now  arose,  and  thus  addressed  his  fellow  bacchanalians;  "gentle- 
men, you  will  excuse  me,  for  a  few  minutes,  as  I  have  a  religious  duty  to 
perform,  Avhen  I  shall  have  done  which,  I  will  immediately  return,  but 
in  the  mean  time,  go  on  with  the  game;  good  morning  gentlemen."  Of 
course,  the  learned  prelate  was  excused,  who  having  performed  his  re- 
ligious services,  soon  returned  and  renewed  his  bacchanalian  revelings 


116  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

with  renewed  vigor.  How  difTerent  are  the  priests  of  California  from 
those  of  the  same  denomination,  of  christians  in  our  own  country  ?  There, 
a-s  above  seen,  we  find  among  them,  the  most  cruel  oppressors,  the  most 
absolute  tyrants,  and  the  most  devoted  and  dissolute  debauchees,  of  the 
whole  land,  while  here,  we  find  among  the  clergy  of  the  same  denomina- 
tion, not  only  the  most  humane,  just  and  honorable  citizens,  but  also  the 
most  meek  and  sincerely  devoted  christians. 

The  Indian  population,  as  before  stated,  amounts  to  about  twenty  thou- 
sand, most  of  whom,  are  found  in  the  interior  and  mountainous  regions, 
yet  they  are  found,  in  greater  or  less  numbers,  in  all  the  different  val- 
leys. They  are  usually  found,  congregated  in  villages,  in  many  of  which, 
there  are,  frequently,  many  hundreds,  and  even  thousands,  who  occupy 
small  huts,  of  most  singular  construction.  These  huts  consist  of  mere 
conic  elevations  of  earth,  about  eight  or  ten  feet  in  height,  and  about 
twenty  feet  in  diameter,  with  a  small  aperture  at  the  top  of  each,  of  about 
two  feet  in  diameter,  which  affords  an  entrance  into  each ;  besides  which, 
there  is  also,  an  entrance  at  the  side  of  each,  near  the  surface  of  the 
earth.  In  each  of  these  villages,  there  are,  usually,  from  ten  to  fifty  of 
this  kind  of  primitive  buildings,  which  are  capable  of  accommodating, 
from  ten  to  twenty  persons.  They  have  the  external  appearance,  of  being 
constructed  entirely  of  earth,  but  upon  entering  them,  they  are  found  to 
be  constructed,  internally  of  timbers,  \\hich  sustain  the  earthen  covering. 
The  Indians  of  this  country,  are  not  migratory,  but  it  is  seen,  that  they 
have,  in  numerous  instances,  abandoned  their  old  haunts,  and  re-estab- 
lished in  other  portions  of  the  country,  but  for  what  cause,  it  is  difficult 
to  ascertain,  with  any  degree  of  certainty,  for  the  sites  which  have  been 
thus  abandoned,  appear  in  many  instances,  to  possess  advantages  much 
superior,  to  those  which  have  been  subsequently  selected.  As  far  as  dan 
be  ascertained,  the  desolating  ravages  of  war,  have  been  the  chief  causes 
of  these  repeated  removals,  for  villages  of  fifty,  or  even  a  hundred  of 
these  huts,  are  frequently  seen,  which  have  the  appearance,  of  having 
been  their  ancient  haunts,  but  which,  are  now  abandoned,  the  ground  at, 
and  around  which,  is  covered  with  human  skulls.  Upon  examining 
several  of  these  huts,  of  these  abandoned  villages,  I  very  readily  found, 
that  whatever  the  cause  of  this  mortality,  might  have  been,  it  was,  evi- 
dently, inflicted  upon  them,  when  within  their  huts,  for  the  earth  of  the 
external  covering  of  the  huts,  having  fallen  in,  was  extensively  intermixed 
with  skulls,  and  other  human  bones.  At  the  villages  which  they  oc- 
cupy, there  are  no  apparent  evidences,  of  that  extensive  mortality,  which 
forrnerly  prevailed,  to  such  an  alarming  extent  among  them,  at  their  aban- 
doned villages.  All  of  the  various  tribes,  of  this  country,  are  found  in 
their  aboriginal  state  of  barbarism,  as  perfectly  wild  and  timid,  as  the 
herds  of  beasts,  with  which  they  are  surrounded.  Upon  approaching  one 
of  their  villages,  without  their  previous  knowledge,  a  scene  of  most  ex- 
traordinary confusion,  and  noisy  clamor  is  presented ;  all  scudding  at 
once,  into  their  earthen  house',  not  a  human  soul  is  to  be  seen,  excepting 
those  who  present  their  heads  through  the  aperture  at  the  apex,  of  each  of 
the  huts,  and  who  are,  in  a  most  clamorous  and  confused  manner,  drawing 
upon  your  humanity  and  mercy,  and  begging  you  to  spare  them,  collect- 
ively and  individually.  The  nearer  you  approach  their  village,  the  more 
boisterous  and  clamorous  they  become,  in  their  loud  and  confused  appeals, 
to  all  the  better. feelings  of  your  nature,  to  spare  their  tribe,  from  the  dire 


TO  OREGON  A 

calamity,  of  extermination,  or,  r» 
which  the  earth  may  be  repeoph 
amid  their  loud  lamentations,  f' 
lations,  your  pity  and  sympa^' 
elude  to  spare  their  village 
heavens  resound,  with  thei 
These  Indians  are  much 
found  in  this  country,  \v" 
nected  with  the  missior 
by  the  by,  is  a  very  sli- 

In  manyother  po' 
do  they  wear  any 
Nothing  whatever 
feathers,  which  r 
hair,  and  which 
about  to  enga 
or  grape-vine 
their  bodies, 
the  waist,  ir 
generally, 
having  p 
as  rude 
of  thes 
ous  re 
acorn' 
nishi 
port 
sec 

OU' 

of 
f 


TS'  GUIDE 

-erne  interior  of  this  counlfry,  I 

hundred,  of  these  wild,  naked 

^  forests,  they  would  leap  and 

'imming  across,  they  would 

ipon  the  opposite  shore. — 

>ually,  found  upon,  and  in 

V  upon  fish,  which  they 

^3  many  of  them  have 

le  to  kill  much  game. 

sh,  not  only  in  quan- 

supply  all  the  dif- 

■>st  trivial  compen- 

they  are  of  the 

erform  all  their 

'  A  very  little  ex- 

ielves. 

one  military 
■»  be,  a  milir 
^  na,  who  is 
He  re- 
he  was 
1  to  his 
D  fill  a 
who 
the 
Seen 
vas 
n- 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA  119 

and  commenced  a  series  of  indiscriminate  insult,  and  oppression  upon  all 
foreigners,  within  his  inhuman  grasp  ;  but  the  foreigners,  not  being  in- 
clined to  submit,  tamely,  to  this  repeated  wrong  and  outrage,  were  now  in 
feeling,  at  least,  in  formidable  and  hostile  opposition,  to  his  supreme  high- 
ness, the  rebel  governor.  His  insignificant  excellency,  continued  his  in- 
sult, cruelty  and  oppression,  from  day  to  day,  and  from  month  to  month, 
but  finally,  after  the  lapse  of  about  three  years,  perceiving  that  he  was 
receiving  his  just  deserts,  the  disapprobation  and  supreme  contempt,  of 
all  foreigners,  as  well  as  that  of  all  the  better  class  of  the  Mexicans, 
now  determined  to  make  one  last,  desperate  effort,  to  redeem  his  lost 
character. 

After  consulting  his  own  black  heart,  and  those  of  some  of  his  villain- 
ous comrades,  in  disgraceful,  cowardly  oppression ;  he  determined  to 
adopt  some  means,  which  might  terminate,  either  in  the  extermination,  or, 
expulsion  of  all  the  foreigners  from  California,  and  in  order  to  accomplish 
his  fiendish  purpose,  he  now  commenced  his  unheard  of  cruelties,  and 
barbarous  oppressions,  with  renewed  vigor  and  malignancy.  His  ex- 
treme and  justly  deserved  unpopularity,  had  a  great  tendency,  to  prevent 
his  desired  success,  in  infamy  and  crime,  until  the  autumn  of  1840,  when, 
by  the  aid  of  others,  more  skilled  in  low  treachery,  and  black  villainy, 
he  finally,  fell  upon  a  scheme,  which  to  some  extent,  effected  his  sinful 
and  criminal  purpose.  The  course  fixed  upon,  was  to  report,  among  all 
the  Mexicans,  that  the  foreigners  had  combined,  for  the  purpose  of  revo- 
lutionizing the  government,  and  establishing  a  republic,  and  that  all  tlve 
preliminary  measures,  preparatory  to  the  accomplishment  of  that  object, 
were  already  adopted.  All  this,  he  well  knew,  to  be  absolutely  false,  yet 
he  also  knew,  that  the  credulous  and  suspicious  Mexicans  would,  very 
readily,  credit  it,  especially,  as  it  came  from  so  credible  a  source,  but  not- 
withstanding the  high  source  from  which  it  was  derived,  he  took  particu- 
lar care,  to  have  it  well  confirmed^  by  three  or  four  other  malicious  vil- 
lains. Lest  the  falsity,  of  this  base  and  murderous  intrigue,  might  be  seen, 
even  by  the  benighted  rabble,  his  criminal  excellency,  was  extremely  cau- 
tious, to  enjoin  upon  every  Mexican,  to  whom  he  reported  this  base  false- 
hood, that  he  keep  the  whole  matter,  a  profound  secret,  and  above  all 
things,  that  he  should  not  divulge  to  any  foreigner,  although  he  might  be 
his  most  intimate  friend,  or  even  closely  a.lied,  by  the  ties  of  affinity  or 
consanguinity.  This  injunction  of  secrecy,  he  well  knew,  to  be  highly 
essential  to  his  cowardly  purpose,  for  he  was  not  ignorant  of  the  fact,  that- 
there  were  many  of  the  foreigners,  whom  he  had  implicated,  in  the  treason- 
ble  schemes  alluded  to,  whose  words  simply,  would  be  entitled  to  greater 
weight,  than  the  solemn  oath  of  himself,  and  his  whole  fraternity;  nor 
was  he  ignorant  of  the  fact,  that  if  the  foreigners  should  acquire,  the  least 
knowledge,  of  his  infamous  designs,  his  excellency  would  soon,  cease  to 
exist  as  governor,  or  in  any  other  manner.  The  whole  matter  was,  there- 
fore, kept  a  profound  secret,  as  far  as  the  foreigners  were  concerned,  for 
there  was  not  one  of  them,  in  the  entire  country,  who  had  the  least  inti- 
mation, that  any  thing  unusual,  was  in  contemplation. 

His  ungrateful  and  black-hearted  excellency,  having  accomplished  his 
unholy  preliminaries,  now  dispatched  a  few  of  his  niggardly  hirelings,  in 
the  dead  of  the  night,  to  the  residences  of  most  of  the  foreigners  through 
out  the  country,  with  orders  to  bring  them,  in  irons,  before  his  supremely 
contemptible  excellency.     Nothing   could  have  been  more  congenial,  to 


120  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

the  feelings  of  this  pusillanimous  crew,  than  the  base  and  cowardly  en- 
terprise, in  which  they  were  about  to  engage ;  that  of  attacking  innocent, 
unoffending  men,  under  cover  of  night;  without  giving  them  the  least  in- 
timation of  their  despicable  designs,  and  that  too,  after  having  treated 
them,  but  tlie  day  before,  with  all  the  apparent  kindness,  and  affected  po- 
liteness, at  the  command  of  their  hypocritical  natures.  Contemptible 
hypocritical  cowards ;  base  midnight  assassins  !  In  most  instances,  the 
first  notice  which  the  foreigners  had  of  their  approach,  was  a  volley  of 
musket  balls,  poured  in  upon  them,  through  their  windows  and  doors,  as 
they  were  reposing  upon  their  couches,  with  their  families,  in  deep,  mid- 
night slumber.  Many  of  them,  most  manfully  resisted,  this  unceremoni- 
ous attack,  but  being  finally  overcome  by  numbers,  forty  of  them  were  ta- 
ken,  put  in  irons,  taken  to  Monterey,  and  delivered  to  that  demon  in  hu- 
man form,  his  more  than  criminal  excellency  Alvarado.  Here  these  brave 
Aiiglosaxons  were  dragged  about,  from  place  to  place,  during  all  the 
following  day,  many  of  them  suffering  most  intensely,  from  the 
wounds  which  they  received,  the  night  before,  and  others,  from  the  sore 
gallings  of  their  ponderous  shackles.  Among  them,  was  one  Graham, 
who  suffered  extremely  ;  for  having  fought  bravely,  and  desperately, 
upon  the  night  previous,  he  had  received  several  very  severe  wounds, 
from  musket  balls,  the  breeches  of  muskets,  and  from  swords ;  but  he 
endured  it  all,  with  the  fortitude  of  an  American,  which  he  is  by  birth ; 
a  brave  determined  American !  These  unfortunate  men,  still  loaded  with 
irons,  were  now  thrown  into  dungeons,  where  they  were  confined  for  sev- 
eral days,  suffering  the  most  exquisite  torture,  from  the  continual  gallings, 
of  their  massive  fetters,  parching  thirst,  and  gnawing  hunger.  But  to 
heighten  their  sufferings,  they  were  all  thrown  together,  into  a  little,  nar- 
row, filthy  dungeon,  the  floor  of  which,  was  the  wet  muddy  ground,  and 
into  which  the  air  was  admitted  only  at  a  small  aperture,  at  which,  scarce- 
ly sufficient  could  be  received,  to  sustain  life.  Under  this  cruel,  oppres- 
sive treatment,  many  of  them  were  rapidly  sinking;  and  had  become  so 
far  exhausted,  that  they  were  no  longer  able  to  stand  at  the  little  aperture, 
to  avail  themselves  of  the  oxygen,  essential  to  the  support  of  life,  but  were 
actually  fast  declining,  under  the  influence  of  the  carbonic  acid  gas,  which 
occupied  the  bottom  of  the  deep,  dark  and  wet  cell.  Their  companions, 
now  seeing  their  exhausted  condition,  immediately,  took  them  to  the  aper- 
ture spoken  of,  where  after  inhaling  the  atmospheric  air  for  a  few  min- 
utes, they  were  partially  revived,  and  thus,  for  several  days,  those  who 
were  able,  going  frequently  to  this  aperture,  and  those  who  were  not  able 
to  stand,  being  carried  to  it,  they  were  able  to  aid  respiration,  and  to  stjs^ 
tain  life,  though  with  the  greatest  possible  difficulty,  and  most  intent 
suffering. 

Having  thus  satiated,  his  more  than  barbarous  revenge,  this  heartless, 
soulless  wretch,  alias  governor,  now  ordered  his  helpless,  and  almost 
lifeless  victims,  to  be  loaded  with  additional  irons,  and  to  be  shipped  for 
Matzatlan,  and  to  be  taken  thence,  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  there  to  be 
dealt  with,  as  the  supreme  authorities  might  direct.  Arrangements  were 
accordingly  made,  when  these  now  pale,  emaciated  and  dejected  men 
were  dragged  from  their  dungeons,  torn  from  their  families  and  friends, 
loaded  with  massive  fetters  and  chains,  and  thrown  on  board  the  vessel, 
by  which  they  were  to  be  conveyed  to  Matzatlan,  or  the  grave,  they  knew 
noijMrhich,  nor  had  they  much  solicitude  ;-s  to  the  result.     So  violeai 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  121 

was  the  suffering,  of  these  unfortunate  men,  that  one  or  two  of  them 
Kiink  under  it,  and  died  before  reaching  Mexico,  while  many  others,  suf- 
fered under  severe  illness,  not  only  during  their  confinement,  but  also  for 
months  after  their  release,  and  all  were  reduced   to  an  extreme  state,  of 
feebleness  and  emaciation.     Upon  arriving  at  the  city  of  Mexico,  an  in- 
vestigation was  instituted,  not  only  by  the  Mexican  authorities,  but  also 
by  the  foreign  ministers,  the  result  of  which  was,  that  they  were  all,  at 
once,  released,  with  a  tender  of  a  small  amount  of  money,  as  a  remunera- 
tion for  the  insults  and  injuries,  which  they  had  thus  wrongfully  sustain- 
ed.    Some  of  them  received  the  trivial  remuneration,  which  was  offered 
them,  while  others  refused,  absolutely,  to  receive  so  trivial  a  remuneration, 
and  hence,  have  not,  to  this  day,  received  a  farthing.     And  is  not  this  a 
gross  neglect  of  our  government,  thus  to  permit  her  citizens  to  be  chained, 
and  dragged  in  irons,  under  the  most  cruel  and  barbarous  treatment,  suf- 
fering every  thing  but  death,  and  even  death  itself,  and  that  too,  without 
the  slightest  cause,  without  a  shadow  of  provocation  ?     The  result  of  all 
this  affair,  as  far  as  the  base  tyrant,  the  governor  is  concerned,  is  all  very 
well,  but  by  no  means  as  he  had  anticipated.     As  before  remarked,  he 
acquired  his  ascendency  forcibly,  and  against  the  will  of  Mexico,  and  the 
only  reason  of  Mexico's  suffering  such  an  outrage  upon  her  rights,  was 
her  dread  of  the  foreigners,  who  adhered  to  him,  in  his  treasonable  ele- 
Tation.     But  now,  finding  that  the  foreigners  had  abandoned  him,  and 
were  most  bitterly  opposed  to  him,  the  government  availed  itself  of  this 
opposition  of  the  foreigners,  and  unceremoniously  removed  this  ungrate- 
ful, cowardly  oppressor,  and,  as  before  stated,  appointed  the  present  gov- 
ernor in  his  stead.     And  now,  being  thus  supplanted,  as  the  fates  will 
have  it,  and  "  plane  uti  factum  oportuit,"  just  as  it  ought  to  be,  he  is  every- 
where looked  upon,  with  the  most  indignant  contempt,  not  only  by  the 
foreigners,  but  also,  by  the  Mexicans,  for  he  has  proved  equally  treacher- 
ous to  both,  and  has  shown  himself  unworthy  of  the  confidence  of  either; 
the  consequence  of  which  is,  that  he  is  now  to  be  seen  wandering  about, 
like  a  "  discontented  ghost,"   having  neither  talent,  worth,  nor  power, 
sufficient  to  attract  the  attention  of  any  human  soul,  he  drags  droanishly 
about,  from  place  to  place,  unobserving  and  unobserved. 

Notwithstanding  the  complete  prostration,  in  public  opinion,  of 
the  treacherous  monster  of  whom  I  have  just  spoken,  the  present 
governor,  had  many  misgivings,  as  to  the  propriety  and  safety,  of 
his  attempting  to  enter  upon  this  discharge,  of  his  gubernatorial  du- 
ties, in  California,  without  a  competent  military  force,  to  ensure  his 
protection.  Having  advised  the  proper  authorities  of  Mexico,  of  his 
fears  and  doubts,  and  some  of  the  grounds  upon  which  they  were  predi- 
cated, one  thousand  criminals  were  extracted,  from  the  various  prisons 
and  committed  to  his  charge.  With  this  formidable  band  of  cut-throats, 
as  their  brands  and  cropped  ears  showed  them  to  be,  he  set  out  upon  his 
march  to  the  Californias,  where  he  arrived  in  the  fall  of  1842,  remaining 
in  the  extreme  southern  part,  of  Upper  California,  until  the  fall  of  1843, 
when  he  collected  sufficient  courage,  to  enable  him  to  advance  to  the  seat 
of  government.  The  timorous  movements  of  the  governor,  and,  especi 
ally,  the  fact  of  his  being  unwilling  to  venture  among  the  Californias, 
without  an  armed  force,  for  his  protection,  created  much  dissatisfaction 
among  them,  which  became  so  general,  at  one  time,  that  they  determined 
15 


123  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

to  interpose  their  omnipotence,  to  prevent  his  excellency  from  marching 
his  omnifarious  troops,  to  the  seat  of  government.  But  before  I  left  that 
country,  his  generalship  was  permitted  to  march  northward,  and  was  in 
full  possession  of  the  chief  town,  there  to  be  seen  marching  and  parading 
his  cropped  and  branded  troops,  about  the  streets,  with  all  imaginable 
pomposity.  Disease  and  dissertion  had  reduced  these  troops,  to  two  hun- 
dred, before  they  arrived  in  California,  but  there  were  quite  enough  of 
them  left,  to  atford  some  of  the  rarest  specimens  of  humanity,  that  I  have 
ever  beheld.  I'hey  were  in  deed  a  motely  crew ;  some  were  cropped,  and 
others  were  branded ;  some  were  without  shoes,  and  others  were  with- 
out shirts ;  some  had  guns,  others  liad  spears,  others  lances,  and  others 
nothing ;  and  the  latter  were  equally  as  well  armed  as  the  former,  for 
those  who  had  guns,  had  no  ammunition.  Thus  armed  and  equipped,  this 
omnifarious  soldiery,  is  prepared  to  meet,  in  mortal  combat,  even  a  Cae- 
sar, a  Hannibal,  a  Bonaparte  or  a  Washington,  but  they  cannot  be  induced 
to  meet  a  Jones.  These  soldiers,  like  all  others  of  Mexico,  are  mere 
Indians,  many  of  whom,  are  as  perfectly  wild  and  untutored,  as  the  most 
barbarous  savages  of  the  forest ;  yet  it  is  with  these  wild,  shirtless,  ear- 
less and  heartless  creatures,  headed  by  a  few  timid,  soulless,  brainless  offi- 
cers, that  these  semi-barbarians,  intend  to  hold  this  delightful  region,  as 
against  the  civilized  world. 

The  Judiciary  of  this  government,  is  extremely  simple  ;  ii  is  divested 
of  all  that  complexity,  peculiar  to  our  judiciary  system.  The  judir 
cial  officers  consist  simply  of  a  few  alcaldes,  or  justices  of  the  peace, 
who  are  appointed  for  each  town,  and  settlement,  throughout  the  country, 
and  who  have  unlimited  jurisdiction,  in  the  precinct  for  which  they  are 
appointed.  The  chief  duties  of  these  alcaldes^  are  merely  to  adjudge  all 
trivial  difficulties,  which  arise  among  the  people,  and  \o  issue  passports  for 
those  who  wish  to  pass  from  one  precinct  to  another,  and  prohibit  their 
passing  without  them.  A  passport,  issued  by  the  alcalde,  is  a  mere  written 
authority,  given  you,  to  pass  to  and  from,  such  places  as  are  designated, 
without  limiting  you  to  any  particular  time,  though  they  always  contain 
the  words,  valid  for  the  time  necessary,  or  words  of  similar  import,  and  a 
request,  of  the  alcalde,  to  the  civil  and  military  authorities,  to  permit  you 
to  pass  unmolested.  The  officers  are  latterly,  very  inattentive  to  that 
branch  of  their  duty,  for  it  is  very  seldom  now,  that  a  foreigner  is  inter- 
rogated in  reference  to  his  passport;  prehaps  it  is  never  the  case,  unless 
the  foreigner  is  an  entire  stranger,  and  the  officers  have  some  good  reason, 
to  apprehend  some  improper  conduct.  In  passing  from  place  to  place, 
no  Mexican  even  spoke  of  my  passport,  unless  it  was,  when  I  applied  for 
its  renewal,  which  I  sometimes  did,  as  I  passed  from  one  precinct  to  an- 
other, although  it  was  not  strictly  necessary.  Upon  one  occasion,  when 
I  applied  for  a  passport,  I  remember  to  have  spoken  to  the  "comman- 
dante,"  in  reference  to  the  propriety  of  being  thus  required,  like  slaves, 
to  obtain  a  permission,  to  pass  from  place  to  place,  when  he  remarked, 
that  the  authorities  were  not  as  strict,  with  foreigners,  in  that  respect,  as 
tliey  had  formerly  been,  for  instance,  he  remarked,  that  if  I  should  pass 
tliroughout  the  entire  country,  the  question  would  never  be  asked,  wheth- 
er I  had  obtained  a  passport.  The  reason  of  this  great  difference,  in  this 
respect,  he  said,  was  that  from  the  long  residence  of  foreigners  among 
them,  they  were  satisfied,  that  they  were  not  as  evilly  disposed,  as  they 
had  formerly  been  supposed  to  be ;  but  the  true  reason  is,  that  they  have 


TO    OREGON   AND   CALIFORNIA.  123 

not  the  balance  of  power,  in  their  favor,  as  they  formerly  had,  which  if 
they  had,  all  their  former  hostility  and  barbarity,  would  be  renewed,  with 
infinite  pleasure.  The  foreigners  are  annually  increasing  in  numbers  and 
power,  the  inevitable  tendency  of  which,  is  clearly  seen  and  understood, 
even  by  the  Mexicans,  hence  it  is,  that  foreigners  are  now  treated  with 
the  utmost  respect,  kindness  and  hospitality.  The  bombardment  of 
Vera  Cruz,  the  triumph  of  Texas,  and  the  impromptu  conquest  of  Cali- 
fornia, by  Com.  Jones,  have  long  since,  taught  them  the  propriety,  of  re- 
specting the  rights  of  foreigners. 

Now,  instead  of  that  inhuman  oppression,  which  was  formerly  inflict- 
ed upon  foreigners,  without  measure  and  without  mercy,  they  are  treat- 
ed with  all  the  deceptive  kindness  imaginable,  and  instead  of  that  hostile 
opposition,  which  formerly  existed  to  the  emigration  of  foreigners  to  that 
country,  every  inducement  is  held  out,  to  encourage  foreign  imigration. 
Large  grants  of  land  are  given  to  each  emigrant,  averaging  from  one  to 
eleven  square  leagues,  the  quantity  depending  upon  the  number  of  mem- 
bers, composing  the  applicant's  family,  and  his  means  of  improving,  by 
building,  fencing  or  otherwise.  In  order  to  obtain  a  grant  of  land,  it  be- 
comes necessary  for  a  foreigner,  first  to  make  an  application  for  naturaliza- 
tion, then  to  present  a  petition  addressed  to  the  governor,  praying  for  a 
grant  of  the  land  which  he  may  have  selected,  and  of  which,  he,  at  the 
same  time,  presents  a  general  map,  representing  its  extent  and  surface. 
This  being  done,  he  is  entitled  to  the  possession  of  his  land,  and  when 
the  process  of  his  naturalization  is  accomplished,  he  is  entitled  to  his 
deed,  which  is  made  by  the  government,  of  California,  under  the  hand 
and  seal  of  the  governor.  Although  the  quantity  of  land  usually  granted 
is  from  one  to  eleven  square  leagues,  yet  it  is  seldom  that  either  extreme 
is  taken,  perhaps  there  are  no  instances  of  any  individuals'  having  ob- 
tained but  one  league,  though  there  are  some  instances,  of  their  having 
obtained  eleven  square  leagues.  There  are  also  several  grants  of  twenty 
or  thirty  square  leagues ;  among  these  extensive  grants,  is  Captain 
Sutter's,  which  contains  thirty  square  leagues,  or  two  hundred  and  seven- 
ty square  miles.  Grants  of  this  extent,  are  given  only  upon  the  condi- 
tion that  the  grantee  settle  a  certain  number  of  families  upon  it,  within  a 
certain  number  of  years,  according  to  the  provisions  of  the  colonization 
law,  which  law,  however,  it  is  said,  has  recently  been  repealed.  Any 
person  arriving  in  that  country,  is  at  liberty  to  take  any  lands  which  are 
not  taken,  or  which  have  not  been  applied  for,  even  without  making  any 
application  for  that  purpose,  but  in  such  case,  he  is  liable  to  be  disposses- 
sed at  any  time,  by  the  lands  being  regularly  applied  for,  by  another.  All 
those  who  emigrated  to  that  country,  with  me,  settled  in  that  manner,  and 
made  some  extensive  improvements,  without  having  made  an  application 
for  a  title,  yet  they  all  designed  to  make  their  applications,  in  due  time. 
The  reason  of  their  not  making  their  application,  immediately,  upon  their 
arrival,  was,  that  it  was,  at  that  time,  rumored,  that  foreigners  would  be 
enabled  to  obtain  their  titles,  without  becoming  citizens,  which  they  all 
very  much  preferred,  if  it  could  be  accomplished.  I  am  aware  that  a 
certain  high  functionary,  at  Washington  city,  who  represents  the  govern- 
ment of  Mexico,  insists  tnat  foreigners  can  not  obtain  lands,  in  Califor- 
nia, merely  by  becoming  citizens,  but  that  their  obtaining  lands,  depends 
entirely,  upon  the  option  of  the  governor  of  CaUfornia.  Now  how  this  may 
be,  I  do  not  pretend  to  say,  but  I  do  say,  that  the  only  prerequisites,  re- 


124  THE   EMIGRANTS'   GUIDE 

quired,  are  those  just  stated,  and  in  reference  to  this  matter,  I  speak  from  my 
own  personal  knowledge,  as  I  called  upon  the  governor,  with  a  view  of 
applying  for  the  grant  of  a  certain  tract  of  land,  when  he  informed  me, 
ds  above  stated.  But  as  I  did  not  think  proper  to  become  a  Mexican 
citizen,  I  did  not  obtain  my  title,  and  as  I  am  fully  determined  ntvex  to 
become  a  Mexican  citizen,  the  presumption  is,  that  I  shall  never  obtain  a 
title  to  the  lands  for  which  I  applied,  especially  if  it  is  the  destiny  of  Mex- 
ico/orev«r  to  retain  possession  of  the  Californias.  In  reference  to  the 
option  of  the  governor  to  grant  lands  or  not,  as  contended  by  the  Mexi- 
can functionary  alluded  to,  it  is  not  at  all  material,  more  specially,  as  it 
happens  to  be  his  fxefntnce^  or  at  least  his  'practice^  to  grant  lands  to  all 
foreigners,  who  make  application  in  conformity  with  the  requisitions  before 
stated.  And  should  his  preference  suggest  a  different  course,  I  am  in- 
clined to  the  opinion,  that  his  excellency  would  still  find  it  much  more 
conducive,  both  to  public  policy  and  peace,  to  grant  lands  upon  the  same 
terms,  to  all  who  make  application  for  that  purpose;  and  thus,  avoid  crea- 
ting distinctions  and  prejudices,  between  native  and  naturalized  citizens. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

A  DESCRIPTON  OF  CALIFORNIA. 

Manners  and  customs.  Lower  classes;  their  huts;  mode  of  constructing 
of.  Second  class;  their  houses;  their  furniture;  their  apparel.  The 
higher  class;  their  houses  and  furniture ;  their  apparel.  A  Me.ricdn 
dinner.  Oxen  xised  for  the  draught.  A  Mexican  yoke.  A  California 
plough.  Saddle  horses  used  for  the  draught.  Mexicans  going  to  mar- 
ket. Method  of  traveling.  Alcalde's  court.  Suits  at  law;  how  conducted. 
A  foreigner  defeated  at  law.  Fandangos.  Cock-fights;  how  conducted. 
Bullfights;  interesting  scenes  at.  Bear-fights;  hmo  conducted.  Market. 
Value  of  cattle;  of  horses;  of  sheep;  of  hogs.  The  staples;  of  what 
consisting.  Trade;  extent  of.  Amount  of  duties.  Labor;  value  of 
Service  of  Indians.  A  species  of  slavery  in  Mexico.  Commerce;  extent 
of.  Ships  of  war.  Merchant  vessels;  time  of  arrival  and  departure. 
UTiale  ships.  Present  and  future  commerce.  Superior  advantages  of 
California. 

The  Mexicans  here,  are  a  peculiar  people,  not  only  in  reference  to 
their  intelligence,  government,  and  all  other  particulars  before  mentioned, 
but  also  in  reference  to  their  manners  and  customs.  The  lower  order 
of  them  live  in  mere  huts,  the  walls  of  which  are  constructed  of  poles,' 
which  are  set  upright,  side  by  side,  one  end  being  permanently  fixed  in 
the  ground;  the  other  ends  are  attached  with  raw  hide  ropes  to  a  pole, 
which  is  placed  horizontally  on  each  side  of  the  walls  thus  constructed, 
and  about  six  or  seven  feet  from  the  ground.  The  four  walls  being  thus 
erected,  poles  are  then  placed  transversely  from  one  wall  to  the  other, 
which  are  covered  either  with  hay,  flags,  or  cornstalks,  constituting  the 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  125 

roof,  when  the  hut  is  completed,  having  neither  flexor  nor  chimney,— 
The  second  and  higher  orders,  occupy  such  buildings  as  those  which 
have  been  described  upon  a  former  page,  most  of  which  are  also  withont 
either  chimneys  or  floors.  No  furniture  is  generally  found  in  or  about 
the  houses  of  the  lower  orders,  excepting  here  and  there  a  raw  bullock's 
hide  spread  upon  the  ground,  which,  together  with  a  blanket  or  two,  con- 
stitutes their  beds  and  bedding.  Their  clothing  generally  consists  of 
nothing  more  than  a  shirt  and  a  pair  of  pantaloons,  yet  some  of  them 
also  have  a  kind  of  rude,  primitive  hat,  and  sandals.  The  chase  and 
servitude  to  the  higher  orders,  furnish  them  a  livelihood ;  they  subsist  al- 
most entirely  upon  meat,  fish,  oats  and  edible  roots.  Those  of  the  second 
and  higher  orders,  who  reside  in  the  interior,  although  they  have  "adobie" 
houses,  yet  they  generally  have  neither  beds,  chairs,  tables,  nor  any  other 
furniture,  excepting  such  beds  as  those  before  described,  and  a  raw  hide 
spread  upon  the  ground,  which  constitutes  a  table,  with  a  few  stools  or 
bullock's  heads,  which  answer  as  chairs.  Their  apparel  consists  of  a 
shirt,  a  pair  of  pantaloons,  some  kind  of  a  hat  and  and  shoes,  or  sandals, 
in  addition  to  which,  some  have  a  pair  of  breeches  and  a  blanket,  with  a 
perforation  in  the  middle,  through  which  they  put  their  heads,  and  thus 
form,  as  they  think,  a  very  convenient  coat  or  cloak.  Meat,  fish,  beans, 
bread  and  fruit,  constitute  their  food.  But  they  subsist  chiefly  upon  the 
former,  as  a  matter  of  preference.  Should  you  call  at  the  residence  of 
one  of  these  Mexicans,  even  of  the  highest  class  residing  in  the  interior,  you 
would  not  only  be  received  very  kindly,  but  you  would  also  be  annoyed 
with  continued  proffers,of  all  the  luxuries  which  they  possess.  And  should 
you  remain  until  noon,  a  large  quantity  of  beef  will  be  roasted  before  the  fire, 
which,  when  done,  will  be  attached  to  a  few  sticks,  which  are  driven  into  the 
ground  for  that  purpose,  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  when  you  are  invited 
to  sit  down  with  them,  and  partake  of  the  rich  repast ;  at  the  same  time,  you 
are  oflered  a  stool  or  beef's  head  as  a  substitute  for  a  chair,  if  there  hap- 
pens to  be  one  convenient,  if  not,  you  are  expected  to  sit  upon  the  ground. 
Being  thus  located,  you  now  commence  the  dissection  and  mastication  of 
the  half,  or  quarter  of  a  beef,  as  the  case  may  be,  with  which  you  are  now 
confronted;  but  in  this  operation,  you  labor  under  the  disadvantage,  ofj 
having  none  of  the  ordinary  instruments,  used  upon  such  occasions  ; 
hence  you  are  under  the  necessity  of  using  your  pocket  knife,  or  such 
other  knife  as  you  may  chance  to  have  in  your  possession.  Among  some 
of  these  people,  in  addition  to  the  roasted  beef,  you  would  also  be  furnish- 
ed with  a  little  bean  soup,  and,  perhaps,  some  bread ;  but  they  all  view 
plates,  knives  and  forks,  and  the  like,  as  merb  useless  appendages. — 
Should  you  call  upon  those  of  the  lower  order,  with  the  view  of  obtain- 
ing a  dinner,  the  presumption  is,  that  the  whole  affair  would  result  in  a 
disgusting  failure,  if  not  on  their  part,  in  an  attempt  to  procure  something 
for  you  to  eat,  at  least,  upon  your  part,  in  your  attempt  to  eat  what  they 
have  succeeded  in  procuring ;  but  whatever  they  have,  they  will  readily 
offer  you,  with  much  apparent  anxiety  to  accommodate.  The  higher 
order  of  those  who  reside  in  the  different  towns,  and  at  the  missions, 
generally  live  very  well,  much,  in  fact,  as  the  foreigners  do,  who  are 
equally  as  abundantly  supplied  with  ail  the  necessaries  and  luxuries  of 
life,  as  citizens  of  our  own  country,  or  those  of  any  other.  All  classes 
of  the  Mexicans  are  unusually  kind  and  hospitable  to  foreigners,  as  far 
as  it  relates  to  their  reception  and  treatment  as  guests.     Whatever  atteor 


126  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

tion  and  kindness  you  may  receive  at  their  hands,  while  guests,  and  how- 
ever  long  you  may  remain  with  them,  they  will  receive  no  compensation, 
but  to  your  proposition  to  remunerate  them,  they  invariably  reply,  "God 
wiU  pay." 

Labor  of  all  kinds  is  performed  by  the  Indians  and  the  lower  order  of 
the  Mexicans,  but  those  who  are  not  bound  in  servitude  to  others,  labor 
very  little,  as  a  competency  of  food  and  raiment,  is  readily  acquired,  Avith 
very  little  jexertion.  Among  all  classes,  oxen  are  principally  used  for 
the  draught,  drawmg  by  their  horns,  instead  of  their  necks,  as  in  the  or- 
dinary manner ;  a  strong  piece  of  timber  about  as  large  as  an  ordinary 
yoke,  IS  placed  upon  the  necks  of  the  oxen,  just  back  of  the  horns,  to 
which  It  is  permanently  attached,  by  means  of  a  raw-hide  rope.  To  the 
middle  of  this  new-fashioned  yoke,  a  strong  raw-hide  rope  is  affixed,  to 
which  the  cart,  plough,  or  whatever  else  is  to  be  drawn,  is  attached, 
when  all  is  in  readiness  for  actual  service.  Those  oxen,  yoked  in  this 
manner,  draw  most  extremely        large  draughts,  but  by  no  means  as 

large  draughts  as  they  could  draw,  if  yoked  in  the  ordinary  manner. 

The  plough,  which  is  in  use  among  the  Mexicans,  is  certainly  among 
the  most  simply  constructed,  and  cheapest  of  farming  utensils,  being,  gen- 
erally, a  mere  forked  stick,  one  prong  of  which,  being  pointed,  answers, 
as  the  share,  and  the  other  having  a  notch  cut  at  the  end,  to  which  a  rope 
may  be  attached,  constitutes  the  beam,  while  the  main '  stalk,  extending 
back  a  few  feet  from  the  union  of  the  two  prongs,  constitutes  the  handle. 
This  is  the  California  plough,  which  is  in  general  use,  throughout  the 
entire  country ;  but  as  an  improvement  upon  this  plough,  some  of  the 
Mexicans  construct  one  in  a  different  manner,  though  with  the  same  re- 
gard to  cheapness,  being  two  sticks  of  timber,  so  attached  as  to  form  a 
plough,  very  much  like  that  just  described;  and  designed  only  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  that,  when  a  natural  fork  cannot  be  conveniently  found. — 
Horses  are  seldom  used  otherwise  than  as  saddle-horses,  but  we  fre- 
quently see  large  draughts,  drawn  by  them,  which,  instead  of  being 
harnessed  in  the  ordinary  manner,  are  put  under  the  saddle,  the  girth  of 
which  IS  drawn  extremely  light,  when  one  end  of  a  strong  raw-hide 
Tope,  is  attached  to  the  stone,  wood,  or  whatever  else  is  to  be  drawn,  while 
the  other  end  is  firmly  attached  to  the  pommel  of  the  saddle.  Every 
thing  being  thus  arranged,  the  Mexican,  with  his  heels  loaded  down 
with  ponderous,gingling  spurs,  now  mounts  his  steed,  to  whose  sides  he 
plies  his  heels  with  such  pomied  exactness,  such  force  and  confused  ging- 
ling,  that,  as  the  or.ly  alternative,  he  leaps  and  darts  away  with  his  im- 
mense load,  notwithstanding  its  very  great  ponderosity.  With  horses  har- 
nessed in  this  manner,  it  is  quite  common  to  see  Mexicans  on  their  way 
to  market,  their  vehicles  being  a  dry  bullock's  hide,  to  which  one  end  of 
a  long  raw-hide  rope  is  attached,  tlie  other  end  of  which,  is  attached  to 
the  pommel  of  the  saddle,  of  their  riding  horses.  Upon  this  hide,  thus 
draggmg  upon  the  ground,  are  heaped  vegetables,  fowls,  and  whatever 
else  they  may  have  in  readiness  for  the  market,  as  well  as  two  or  three 
women  and  children,  which,  from  ail  appearances,  are  not  designed  for 
the  market,  or,  at  all  events,  it  would  seem  that  they  would  not  sell  to  a  very 
good  advantage^  without  the  preparatory  expense  of  a  thorough  scouring. 
Upon  arriving  in  market.  I  have  frequently  seen  these  inventive  geniuses, 
with  their  strange  omnibuses,  and  omnifarious  loading,  passing  about  from 
place  10  place,  until  they  disposed  of  all  their  load,  excepting  that  part  of  it 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  127 

which  partook  somewhat  of  humanity,  when  they  also  disposed  of  their 
extraordinary  vehicles,  and  returned  to  their  homes  as  they  best  could, 
some  on  horse  back,  some  on  foot,  and  others,  I  knew  not  how,  unless  by 
"5^ea?«,"  to  raise  which,  they  appeared  to  be  making-  some  efforts,  which 
I  thought,  would  most  likely  succeed.  These  are  the  vehicles  in  com- 
mon use,  among-  the  Mexicans,  but  many  of  the  foreigners,  as  well  as 
some  of  the  higher  order  of  the  Mexicans,  have  carts,  wagons,  and  even 
carriages,  but  these  are  very  seldom  seen,  and  especially  the  latter ;  as 
traveling  is,  as  yet,  almost  entirely  on  horseback  and  by  water,  the  former 
of  which  methods,  is,  however,  much  the  most  generally  adopted,  both  by 
the  Mexicans  and  foreigners. 

As  we  are  passing,  perhaps  the  reader  would  be  pleased  to  notice  the 
proceedings  of  a  Mexican  alcalde's  court.  An  individual,  wishing  to  in- 
stitute proceedings  in  one  of  their  courts,  for  the  recovery  of  a  demand, 
applies  to  the  alcalde  for  that  purpose,  who,  instead  of  issuing  a  summons, 
despatches  a  servant  post  haste,  to  the  residence  of  the  defendant,  inform- 
ing him,  that  his  attendance  at  the  alcaldes'  office,  will  be  required  on  a 
certain  day,  to  answer  the  complaint  of  the  plaintiff;  and  that,  if  he  do 
not  appear  at  the  time  and  place  designated,  the  alcalde,  will  proceed  to 
ihe  determination  of  the  matter  exparte.  The  day  thus  fixed  upon  ar- 
rives, and  the  parties  appearing,  his  honor,  now  interrogates  the  defend- 
ant in  reference  to  his  delinquency,  when  he  proceeds  to  offer  such  excu- 
ses as  may  occur  to  him,  setting  forth  his  reasons  for  not  having  made 
payment  previously,  or  he  commences  to  curse  his  antagonist  most  vocif- 
erously ;  and  insulting  and  abusing  him  to  every  extent,  declaring  abso- 
lutely, that  he  will  not  pay  him,  which  is  the  "general  issue  "  in  Calfor- 
nia.  According  to  the  rules  of  practice  in  the  alcalde's  court,  the  plain- 
tiff is  now  entitled  to  the  floor,  v/hich  he  takes  with  the  greatest  eager- 
ness, when  he  commences  to  answer  all  the  excuses  and  arguments  of  the 
defendant,  or  to  repel  his  insults,  by  more  direct,  and  more  numerous  in- 
sults, as  well  as  by  more  vehement,  and  more  profane  cursing.  If  the 
proceedings  have  taken  the  latter  course,  his  honor  has  nothing  to  do,  but 
to  weigh  the  insult  and  profanity,  and  give  his  judgment  according  to  the 
preponderance,  as  it  may  be  found  in  favor  of  the  plaintiff  or  the 
defendant ;  but  if  they  have  taken  the  former  course,  his  honor  pro- 
ceeds to  determine,  as  to  the  weight  and  vr.lidity  of  the  defendant's  ex- 
cuses, which  are  thrown  into  th«  Mexican's  scales  of  justice,  with  the 
plaintiff's  demand ;  and,  as  before,  the  decision  i-s  according  to  the 
preponderance.  In  weighing  and  determining  causes  as  above,  much 
less  depends  upon  the  quantum  of  insult,  profane  cursing,  the  validity 
of  the  excuse,  or  the  justness  of  the  demand,  than  upon  the  weights  which 
are  employed,  which  are  usually  of  gold,  sometimes,  however,  they  are 
of  silver,  but  when  those  of  the  latter  metal  are  used,  they  are  made  much 
heavier,  the  proportion  between  those  of  the  latter  and  former  metal,  be- 
ing nearly  as  sixteen  to  one.  These  weights  are  always  employed  upon 
such  occasions,  and  they  are  furnished,  for  that  purpose,  either  by  the 
parly  himself,  or  by  a  friend ;  in  English  they  are  called  bribes,  and  it  is 
now  reduced.,  by  experience,  to  an  absolute  certainty,  that  he  that  will 
not  bribe,  can  not  succeed  at  law,  in  a  Mexican  alcalde's  court.  At  laic^ 
I  say,  I  mean  the  game  above  alluded  to,  which,  perhapn,  partakes  as  lit- 
tle of  law  as  it  does  of  divinity.  A  foreigner  of  respectability,  informed 
me,  that  he  found  it  necessary  in  one  instance,  to  resort  to  the  law  for  the 


rC-  -.. 


1 

128  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

recovery  of  a  demand,  which  he  held  against  a  farmer,  who  was  amply 
able  to  pay  him  at  any  time,  if  he  was  so  disposed.  In  order,  therefore, 
to  regulate  his  disposition,  this  gentleman  applied  to  an  alcalde,  who  im- 
mediately issued  his  warrant,  (an  athletic  servant,)  and  soon  the  delinquent 
was  ushered  into  the  alcade's  august  presence,  where  he  commenced  to 
offer  his  numerous  excuses,  the  principal  of  which  was,  that  his  cattle 
were  not  sufficiently  fattened  for  the  slaughter-house,  and,  consequently, 
to  kill  them  then,  would  subject  him  to  a  very  great  loss.  The  kind 
hearted,  lenient  judge,  now  appeared  to  symphathize  greatly  with  the 
defendant,  which,  however,  was  the  effect  of  the  golden  weights,  which 
had  already  been  thrown  into  the  scales,  which  were  now,  evidently,  pre- 
ponderating in  the  defendant's  favor.  The  magnanimous  judge,  pausing 
a  few  moments,  but  finding  no  disposition  on  the  part  of  the  foreign  gen- 
tleman, to  apply  either  the  golden  or  silver  weights,  now  asks  the  defen- 
dant, when  his  cattle  will  be  so  fattened  as  to  enable  him  to  kill  them  and 
discharge  the  plaintiff's  demand,  to  which  the  defendant  replies,  that  he 
thinks  they  will  be  amply  fattened  in  about  twelve  months  ;  "  very  good" 
replies  the  alcalde,  "let  the  cause  stand  continued  until  next  autumn." 
The  parties  now,  severally,  returned  to  their  homes,  the  defendant  much 
elated  with  his  triumphant  success  at  law^  and  the  plaintiff,  laboring  under 
the  sting  of  his  unexpected  defeat,  is  perfectly  disgusted  with  every  thing 
that  bears  the  name  of  law,  alcalde,  or  defendant.  But  the  year  soon  rolls 
around,  and  the  parties  again  appear  before  his  honor,  the  dignified  and 
bribed  alcalde,  who,  immediately,  proceeds  to  propound  the  same  questions 
to  the  defendant,  as  before,  in  reference  to  the  fitness  of  his  cattle  for  the 
slaughter-house.  Although  the  defendant  did  not  give  the  same  answer 
as  before,  yet  he  gave  one,  which  more  clearly  exhibited  the  baseness, 
and  contemptible  meanness  of  both  himself  and  the  perjured  alcade, 
which  was,  that  his  cattle  were  sufficiently  fattened,  but  that  he  was  una- 
ble to  procure  sufficient  laborers.  The  parties  now  again  returned  to 
their  respective  homes,  the  defendant  rejoicing  in  "  the  glorious  uncer- 
tainties of  the  law,"  and  the  plaintiff,  more  fully  than  ever,  convinced  of 
its  tendency  to  obstruct  justice,  and  to  promote  villainy  and  crime ;  and, 
hence  more  fully  than  ever,  determined  to  have  no  more  to  do  with  either 
lau\  alcaldes,  or  defendants. 

The  chief  amusements  of  the  Mexicans,  are  their  fandangos  or  balls, 
cock-fights,  and  bull  and  bear-fights.  The  fandangos,  or  balls,  are  con- 
ducted among  these  people,  much  in  the  same  manner,  that  they  are 
elsewhere,  or  so  nearly  so,  at  least,  that  there  is  nothing  connect- 
ed with  them,  which  I  shall  particularly  notice,  although  there  are 
many  very  extraordinary  and  interesting  scenes,  that  occur  -upon 
these  occasions,  which  might  be  so  described,  as  to  afford  some  amuse- 
ment, yet,  as  their  description  would  afford  no  important  information,  I 
pass  them  unnoticed.  The  cock-fights  are  always  attended  by  large  con- 
courses of  people,  especially  upon  the  Sabbath,  when  not  only  the  common 
people,  but  also  the  officers  of  the  government,  as  well  as  the  priests,  all  of 
whom  march  in  solemn  procession,  directly  from  the  church,  after  divino 
service,  to  the  cockpit,  where  they  anticipate  much  from  the  approaching  ex- 
hibition of  inhuman  cruelty.  Various  opinions  are  now  entertained  and 
expressed,  as  to  the  probable  success  of  the  various  game  cocks ;  and  all  is 
high  joy,  noisy  merriment,  among  the  priests  and  all  others,  the  latter  of 
whom,  are  frequently  heard  to  utter  the  most  vehement,  exulting,  and 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  129 

triumphant  shouts  of  acclamation  and  joy,  witli  repeated  and  vehement 
outcries  of  "huzza,  for  the  priest's  cock  !  "  The  bull-fights  are  much 
the  most  common  amusements,  and  it  is  almost  incredible,  with  what  ar- 
dor and  zeal,  the  citizens  of  all  classes,  and  of  both  sexes,  crowd  together, 
at  these  inhuman  scenes  of  cruelty  and  blood.  In  the  vicinity  of  every 
town  of  any  importance,  there  is  a  vast  arena  in  the  form  of  an  amphithea- 
tre, desigued  for  sports  of  this  kind,  which  is  circumscribed  by  a  strong 
post  and  rail,  or  board  fence,  around  the  exterior  of  which,  are  successive 
circular  seats,  rising  above  one  another  to  the  height  of  tifteen  or  twenty 
feet,  and  of  sufficient  extent,  to  accommodate  several  thousand  persons. 
Timely  notice  is  always  given  of  these  bull-fights,  and  a  general  attend- 
ance, universally  follows;  savoring  so  strongly  of  barbarity,  cruelty  and 
indolence,  it  could  not  fail  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  admiring  thou- 
sands, of  those  semi-barbarians.  The  governor  with  all  the  principal 
officers,  together  with  the  priests,  always  occupies  the  highest  seats  upon 
such  occasions;  and  their  smiling  approbation,  especially  of  the  priests, 
whether  drunk  or  sober,  is  always  considered  a  much  higher  encomium, 
than  the  thundering  plaudits  of  all  the  surrounding  multitude.  And  the 
priests  are  quite  certain  to  laugh,  whether  there  is  any  thing  to  laugh  at  or 
not,  especially,  if  their  merriment  has  been  sufficiently  excited  by  the 
enlivening  and  inebriating  draughts,  to  which  they  are  accustomed. 
Upon  these  occasions,  you  will  frequently  see,  one  fourth  of  all  the  Mex- 
ican population  present,  occupying  the  various  seats  before  described, 
which,  when  thus  occupied,  are  covered  with  an  extensive  awning.  Be- 
ing thus  arranged  and  accompanied  by  a  band  of  music,  or,  rather,  of  iioisc^ 
and  the  bull-fighters,  having  marched  into  the  arena,  the  signal  is  given,  and 
the  bull  is  loosed,  when  the  fight  commences.  Some  of  the  bull-fighters 
are  on  foot,  others  are  on  horseback,  the  latter  being  generally  well  trained 
in  equestrian  exercises,  and  all  being  armed  with  swords,  spears,  or  lan- 
ces, they  now  commence  action,  either  on  the  offensive  or  defensive,  but 
generally,  on  the  defensive ;  for  usually,  the  moment  the  bull  is  turned 
loose  he  makes  a  most  furious  charge,  either  upon  the  footmen  or  horse- 
men, when  he  receives  repeated  lacerations,  from  both  spears  and  lances. 
If  he  attacks  a  horseman,  his  repeated  assaults  are  resisted  by  the  horse- 
man, until  a  footman  comes  to  his  aid,  who  thrusts  a  spear  or  lance  into 
him,  from  behind,  and,  at  the  same  time,  exhibits  a  red  flag,  and  thus  his 
attention  is  diverted  from  the  horseman,  who  would  otherwise  have  been 
an  easy  prey.  His  attention  is  now  turned  to  the  footman,  who  is  in  a 
similar  manner,  relieved  either  by  a  horseman  or  by  another  footman. 
This  scene  is  repeated  from  time  to  time,  and,  until  the  fatigued  and 
wounded  bull  moves  slowly  away  to  one  side  of  the  arena,  as  if  desirous 
of  avoiding  further  conflict,  when  a  most  tremendous  burst  of  applause 
resounds  through  the  air,  amid  which  the  priests  are  heard,  loudly  ex- 
claiming, "  non  potest  fieri  melius !  non  potest  fieri  melius  ! "  as  well 
as  heart  could  wish  !  as  \ve\\  as  heart  could  wish  ! 

These  repeated  and  continued  plaudits,  excite  the  pride  and  renew  the 
energies  of  the  tormentors,  who  proceed  to  the  renewal  of  the  bloody 
scene,  but  the  indisposition  of  the  bull  to  renew  the  contest,  appears  to 
afford  a  serious  obstacle,  yet  the  ingenuity  of  these  cruel  tormentors, 
readily  invents  the  means  of  arousing  his  last  and  dying  energies.  Hun- 
dreds of  squibs  and  crackers,  are  now  brought,  which  are  attached  to 
15 


130  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

one  end  of  wires,  the  other  ends  of  which  are  pointed  and  hearded,  which 
are  then  thrush  into  the  neck,  shoulders,  and  back  of  the  sinking  ani- 
HKil ;  biit  he  is  so  far  exhausted,  that  he  entirely  disregards  them,  until 
fire  is  applied  to  them,  when  the  incessant  cracking,  hissing,  smoking 
and  blazing,  arouse  all  his  declining  vigor.  He  now  shakes  his  head 
most  furiously,  amid  the  firing,  smoking  confusion,  then  bellowing  aloud, 
and  distending  his  tongue,  as  if  calling  into  requisition  all  his  powers,  he 
plunges  and  leaps  at  his  antagonist,  and  striking  the  horse,  prostrates 
him,  rider  and  all,  upon  the  ground,  amid  the  deafening  shouts  of  the 
multitude,  and  the  vociferous  exultations  of  the  priests,  who  are  heard 
above  all  others,  loudly  exclaiming;  "prospere  procedit  opus  !  prospere 
procedit  opus!"  the  business  goes  on  well!  the  business  goes  on  well! 
But,  in  the  mean  time,  the  bull  is  goring  and  lacerating  his  fallen  vic- 
tim, with  the  greatest  fury;  and  soon  it  is  found  that  the  horse  is  dead, 
and  that  the  rider,  from  the  fall  of  the  horse  upon  one  of  his  legs,  and 
the  successive  blows  of  the  bull's  head  and  horns  upon  the  other,  is 
unable  to  maintain  an  upright  position;  but  by  the  aid  of  a  few  of  his 
bro.vt  comrades,  he  makes  good  his  retreat,  when  the  very  heavens  re- 
sound with  thundering  shouts,  and  vociferous  peals  of  laughter  from 
the  excited  multitude,  who  appear  to  be  entirely  indifferent,  which  of 
the  animals  succeeds,  whether  those  in  quadruped  or  human  form. — 
This  scene  is  also  enjoyed  to  every  extent  by  the  priests,  who  are  now 
heard  exclaiming  most  vociferously,  "  exitus  acta  probat,"  all  is  well  that 
ends  well,  which  they  repeat  time  after  time,  not  only  with  the  view  of 
evincing  their  extreme  delight,  but  also  with  a  view  of  exhibiting  some 
proofs  of  their  more  than  ordinary  learning.  The  attention  of  all,  is, 
again,  turned  to  the  offending  buli,  upon  which  repeated  assaults  are 
made,  both  in  front  and  rear,  and  he  is  soon  dispatched,  when  one 
end  of  several  strong  ropes,  is  attached  to  his  hinder  legs,  and  the 
other,  to  the  pommels  of  the  saddles,  and  he  is  soon  dragged  out 
of  the  arena.  But  soon  another  bullock  is  brought  in,  and  the  same  in- 
human scene  is  again  performed,  which  is  followed  by  similar  circum- 
stances, and  so  on  continuously,  until  five  or  six  bulls  have  been  thus  in- 
hwmanly  tortured  and  slain,  when  the  whole  multitude  disperse,  amid 
the  most  indescribable  confusion,  and  return  to  their  respective  places  of 
abode,  with  ample  topics  of  conversation  for  many  months  to  come. — 
The  "  bear-fights,"  as  they  are  called,  are  conducted,  in  a  manner,  quite 
similar  to  that  just  described,  the  only  difference  being,  that  those  human 
or,  rather,  inhuman  combatants,  the  Mexicans,  are  not  called  into  requi- 
sition. The  combatants,  in  these  conflicts  of  death,  are  a  bear  and  a  bull, 
which  are  turned  into  the  arena  together,  the  bear  being,  generally,  turned 
in  first,  where  he  is  permitted  to  remain  alone,  until  all  things  are  in 
readiness  for  the  fatal  combat,  when  the  bull  is  also  brought  in,  upon 
which,  the  bear  rises  slowly  upon  his  hinder  legs,  and  sits  upright,  until 
he  is  assailed.  The  bull,  casting  wildly  about  the  arena,  soon  perceives 
his  powerful  antagonist,  when  he  curbs  his  neck,  and  moves  slowly  to- 
wards him,  turning  first  one  side  towards  him,  then  the  other,  until  he 
approaches  near  him,  when,  at  once,  he  darts  forward,  and  thus  engages 
in  mortal  combat.  The  result  of  these  conflicts  is,  invariably,  either  that 
the  bull  strikes  his  adversary  with  such  irresistible  force,  that  he  is  thrown 
upon  his  back,  and  the  horns  of  the  bull  are  thrust  into  him  with  such 
force,  and  in  such  quick  succession,  as  to  leave  him  lifeless  in  a  very  few 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA  131 

mintites,  or,  that  the  bear,  acquiring  some  advantage  in  the  outset,  gives 
him  such  tremendous  blows  with  his  paws,  as  to  dash  him  to  the  ground, 
when,  continuing  the  assault,  his  horned  adversary  is  soon,  and  easily, 
rendered  a  lifeless  prey. 

The  market,  trade,  and  commerce  will  now  be  briefly  noticed,  when 
I  shall  have  done  with  California.  There  is,  at  this  time,  an  ample  mar- 
ket, in  all  the  various  portions  of  this  country,  for  all  the  surplus  products 
of  whatever  kind ;  and  this  market  is  certain  and  uniform,  being  subject 
to  none  of  those  fluctuations,  to  which  our  market,  in  all  portions  of  the 
States,  is  subject.  Wheat  has  uniformly  sold,  in  all  portions  of  this  coun- 
try, for  about  one  dollar  per  bushel,  which  it  is  now  worth;  corn  is  worth 
fifty  cents  per  bushel ;  beans  one  dollar  per  bushel ;  and  potatoes  fifty 
cents  per  bushel ;  cattle  are  worth  from  one,  to  five  dollars  per  head ; 
horses  from  three,  to  ten  dollars ;  sheep,  from  one  to  two  dollars ;  and 
hogs  from  one  to  three  dollars ;  hides  are  worth  from  one  to  two  dollars 
each ;  tallow  from  two  to  five  cents  per  pound ;  beef  from  one  to  three 
cents  per  pound ;  butter  from  five  to  twenty  cents  per  pound  ;  and  flour 
from  five  to  eight  dollars  per  barrel ;  which  prices,  with  very  few  excep- 
tions, have  remained  the  same  for  successive  years.  The  Hudson's  Bay 
Company,  and  the  Russians,  at  present,  aflbrd  an  ample  market  for  all 
th-e  wheat,  which  is,  as  yet,  grown  in  this  country;  and  they,  as  well  as 
the  American  merchants,  aflbrd  an  extensive  market  for  the  furs,  hides, 
and  tallow,  as  well  as  much  of  the  beef,  butter  and  vegetables,  yet  for 
the  latter,  especially  the  beef,  butter  and  vegetables,  the  ships  of  war  and 
the  whale  ships,  afford  the  most  extensive  and  valuable  market.  The 
increasing  emigration,  however,  will  aflbrd  an  extensive  market  for  mosi 
of  the  surplus  grain,  as  well  as  for  many  cattle  and  horses,  sheep  and 
hogs,  for  many  years  to  come ;  yet  the  market,  for  all  the  products  of  the 
country,  will  be,  ultimately,  found  in  the  South  American  States,  the  vari- 
ous islands  of  the  Pacific,  the  Russian  settlements,  China  and  England, 
The  very  great  variety  of  the  productions,  will  require  a  variety  of  markets; 
producing  the  tropical  productions,  it  requires  a  northern  market;  and  as 
it  produces  the  northern  productions,  it  requires  a  southern  market.  The 
staples  will  eventually  be,  beef,  pork,  fish,  various  kinds  of  grain,  flour, 
wool,  hides,  tallow,  furs,  lumber,  cotton,  tobacco,  rice,  sugar,  and  coffee, 
as  well  as  coal,  iron,  and  various  other  minerals.  This  very  great  variety 
of  productions  will  afford  the  people  of  this  region,  all  the  means  of  sub- 
sistence within  their  own  country,  will  vastly  enhance  its  wealth,  and 
add,  in  an  eminent  degree,  to  the  prosperity  and  happiness  of  the  people. 

The  trade  of  this  country  is  chiefly  carried  on  at  the  different  towns, 
where,  considering  the  extreme  newness  and  unsetfled  state  of  the  coun- 
try, it  is  already  very  extensive.  At  each  of  the  towns  before  enumera- 
ted, there  are  several  stores,  at  which  an  extensive  business,  is  daily  trans- 
acted, which  is  found  to  be  very  lucrative.  All  kinds  of  dry  goods,  gro- 
ceries, hardware,  and  cutlery,  are  much  dearer  here,  than  they  are  either 
in  Oregon  or  the  States,  being  sold  here,  at  prices,  about  five  hundred 
per  cent  higher,  than  they  are  in  either  of  those  countries,  which  is  own- 
ing to  the  imposition  of  excessive,  and  unparalleled  duties  upon  imports. 
The  enormous  amount  of  duties,  that  is  annually  received  by  tl>e  govern- 
ment, or,  rather,  the  prodigal  officers  of  the  government,  notwithstanding 
the  innumerable  leaks,  is  estimated  at  two  hundred  thousand  dollars. 
Wages  of  labor,  both  for  mechanics  and  ordinary  hands,  are  very  high 


132  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

those  of  the  former  being  from  two  to  five  dollars  per  day,  and  those  of  the 
latter,  from  one  to  three  dollars  per  day.  The  cause  of  wages'  being 
so  very  high,  is  attributable  to  the  fact,  of  their  being  so  very  few  mechan- 
ics in  the  country,  and  the  great  aversion  to  industrial  pursuits,  which 
has,  heretofore  existed,  in  that  country.  This  aversion  to  industry,  evi- 
dently arose,  from  the  fact  of  their  being  no  apparent  necessity  to  labor, 
or,  in  other  words,  from  the  unparalleled  facilities,  which  here  exist  for 
acquiring  a  competency,  and  even  a  superfluity,  by  the  easy  process  of 
doing  nothing.  Indians  are  readily  employed,  and,  in  any  numbers,  at 
the  trifling  expense  of  merely  furnisliing  them  such  clothing,  as  a  course 
tow  shirt,  and  a  pair  of  pantaloons  of  similar  cloth,  and  with  such  food 
as  meat  alone,  or  whatever  else  you  may  feel  disposed  to  furnish  them  ; 
for  any  thing,  which  you  might  feel  disposed  to  provide  for  them,  would 
be  preferable  to  the  crickets  and  grasshoppers,  upon  which  they  have  for- 
merly subsisted.  There  are  several  foreigners,  who  have  from  one,  to 
four  hundred  of  them  employed  upon  these  terms;  and  when  thus  em- 
ployed, should  they  leave  their  employer,  without  just  cause,  he  is  au- 
thorized to  retake  them,  wherever  he  may  find  them,  in  whosesoever  ser- 
vice they  may  be  engaged.  It  is  usually  understood,  that  slavery  does  not 
exist,  in  any  form,  in  any  portion  of  the  Mexican  dominions,  yet  the  na- 
tives, both  in  California,  and  several  other  portion  of  that  country,  and  in 
truth,  in  all  portions  of  it,  are  in  a  state  of  absolute  vassalage,  even  more 
degrading,  and  more  oppressive  than  that  of  our  slaves  in  the  south. 
Whether  slavery  will,  eventually,  be  tolerated  in  this  country,  in  any  form, 
I  do  not  pretend  to  say,  but  it  is  quite  certain,  that  the  labor  of  Indians 
will,  for  many  years,  be  as  little  expensive  to  the  farmers  of  that  cou:itry, 
as  slave  labor,  being  procured  for  a  mere  nominal  consideration. 

Considering  the  very  short  space  of  time,  which  has  elapsed,  since  the 
different  governments  have  turned  their  attentions  to  this  country,  and 
the  very  little  which  is,  as  yet,  known  in  reference  to  it,  its  present  com- 
merce is  scarcely  paralleled ;  some  conception  of  which,  may  be  drawn 
from  what  has  been  said  upon  a  former  page,  in  reference  to  its  extensive 
imports  and  duties.  Fifteen  or  twenty  vessels  are,  not  unfrequently,  seen 
in  many  of  the  various  ports  at  the  same  time,  displaying  the  national  flags 
of  all  the  principal  powers  of  the  world.  Merchant  vessels  of  the  United 
States,  England,  France,  Russia,  and  Mexico,  as  well  as  the  ships  of 
war,  and  the  whale  ships  of  the  four  former  governments,  are  to  be  seen, 
at  almost  any  time,  in  the  different  ports  of  this  country,  and  of  all  of 
which,  there  are  frequent  arrivals  and  departures.  The  ships  of  war, 
which  cruise  in  the  Pacific,  touch  very  frequently  at  the  various  ports  of 
this  country,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  fresh  supplies  of  water,  and  pro- 
visions, and  maintaining  the  rights  of  their  respective  governments,  as  well 
as  for  the  purpose  of  capturing,  now  and  then,  a  small  town,  or  seizing, 
here  and  there,  upon  an  island  of  the  Pacific.  The  merchant  vessels  are 
much  the  most  numerous,  and  are,  chiefly,  those  of  the  United  States, 
which  arrive  in  that  country  each  spring,  and  depart  for  the  States  eve- 
ry autumn  or  winter.  Arriving  in  the  spring,  they  are  engaged  in  the  coast- 
ing trade,  until  the  latter  part  of  the  fall,  or  the  early  part  of  the  winter, 
when  they  depart  for  the  States,  with  cargoes  of  hides,  tallow,  or  furs, 
which  have  been  collected  during  the  previous  year.  About  one  half  of 
the  merchant  vessels,  engaged  in  this  trade,  always  remain  in  the  country, 
engaged  in  the  coasting  trade,  while  the  residue  return  to  the  States.     Eng- 


I 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  133 

land,  or  France,  for  tlie  purpose  of  renewing-  their  stock  of  goods.  Sev- 
eral of  these  vessels  usually  belong  to  the  same  houses, either  of  Boston 
or  New  York,  which  always  keep  a  number  in  the  country,  while  they 
employ  others,  constantly,  in  exporting  the  products  of  California,  and 
importing  goods  for  that  trade,  which  they  dispose  of  at  most  extraordi- 
nary prices.  The  whale  ships  touch  at  the  various  ports,  for  the  purpose 
of  obtaining  supplies  of  provisions  and  water,  and  also  for  the  purpose  of 
trade  with  the  inhabitants.  Besides  the  ships  and  vessels  above  enumer- 
ated, there  are  numerous  others,  as  well  as  various  barques  and  brigs, 
which  annually  touch  at  the  various  ports  of  this  country,  not  only  from 
the  States,  England,  France,  and  Russia,  but  also  from  the  Sandwich  Is- 
lands, the  Russian  settlements,  and  China. 

The  foregoing  will  enable  us  to  form  very  correct  conclusions,  in  refer- 
ence to  the  present  and  future  commerce  of  this  infant  country,  the  for- 
mer of  which,  considering  the  newness  of  the  country,  and  the  sparse- 
ness  of  the  population,  is  scarcely  equalled,  and,  if  the  present  may  be 
considered  as  a  prelude  to  the  future,  the  latter  is  destined,  in  a  very  few 
years,  to  exceed,  by  far,  that  of  any  other  country  of  the  same  extent  and 
population,  in  any  portion  of  the  known  world.  We  are  necessarily  driv- 
en to  this  conclusion,  when  we  consider  the  vast  extent  of  its  plains  and 
valleys,  of  unequalled  fertility  and  exuberance;  the  extraordinary  vari- 
ety and  abundance,  of  its  productions,  its  unheard  of  uniformity,  and  sa- 
lubrity of  climate;  in  fine,  its  unexhausted  and  inexhaustible  resources,  as 
well,  as  its  increasing  emigration,  which  i«  annually  swelling  its  popula- 
tion, from  hundreds  to  thousands,  and  which  is  destined,  at  no  distant  day, 
to  revolutionize  the  whole  commercial,  political,  and  moral  aspect  of  all 
that  highly  important  and  delightful  country.  In  a  word,  I  will  remark 
that  in  my  opinion,  there  is  no  country,  in  the  known  world,  possessing 
a  soil  so  fertile  and  productive,  with  such  varied  and  inexhaustible  re- 
sources, and  a  climate  of  such  mildness,  uniformity  and  salubrity;  nor  is 
there  a  country,  in  my  opinion,  now  known,  which  is  so  eminently  cal- 
culated, by  nature  herself,  in  all  respects,  to  promote  the  unbounded  hap- 
piness and  prosperity,  of  civilized  and  enlightened  man. 


134  *  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
A  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  ROUTES. 

The  different  routes  ;  number  of.  Route  between  Brown''s  and  Hooker^s 
peaks.  Route  through  the  southern  pass;  description  of.  Excrement  of 
buffalo  tised  for  fuel.  Buffalo,  where  first  found;  in  what  numbers  seen. 
The  Pawnees;  hostility  of.  The  Cumanches  and  Sioux;  where  found. 
Forts  Larimie  and  John;  description  of;  extent  of  trade  at.  The  Black 
hills;  singularity  of.  Independence  rock;  description  of;  celebration  of 
the  fourth  of  July  at.  Difficulty  of  taking  wagons  to  Oregon;  ease  of 
taking  them  to  California.  Nearest  route  to  California.  Distance  from, 
Independence  to  the  Pacific.  Comparative  eligibility  of  the  California 
route.  Sante  Fe  route;  partial  importance  of  Route  by  Vera  Cruz; 
description  of.  Dangers  to  which  travellers  are  exposed;  not  permitted 
to  carry  arms.  Foreigners  frequently  killed.  Insecurity  against  robbers. 
Armed  escort;  cowardice  and  treachery  of.  Unmeaning  religious  cere- 
monies; danger  from  not  conforming  to.  A  foreigner  killed  in  the  City 
of  Mexico.  The  route  by  sea;  facilities  for  traveling  by.  Comparative 
advantages  and  disadvantages  oj  'he  different  routes.  Route  through  the 
southern  pass  preferred. 

Having  perused  the  foregoing  pages,  the  reader  may  have  determined 
to  emigrate  to  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  countries,  if  so,  his  next  in- 
quir}'-  is.  in  reference  to  the  routes,  the  equipment,  supplies,  and  the  method 
of  traveling,  all  of  which  will  now  be  noticed,  in  their  proper  order. 
In  all  there  are  eight  distinct  routes  to  those  countries,  six  of  which  lie 
through  the  different  passes,  mentioned  upon  a  former  page;  one  of  the 
remaining  two  >s  that  by  the  way  of  New  Orleans,  Vera  Cruz,  the  City 
of  Mexico,  and  Matzatlan  ;  and  the  other  is  the  route  by  sea,  by  the  way 
of  Cape  Horn.  There  are  but  five  of  the  above  routes,  which  are  worthy 
of  a  particular  notice ;  all  of  which,  I  will  now  proceed  briefly,  to  describe. 
The  most  northern  of  them,  is  that  lying  through  the  great  gap,  between 
Brown's  and  Hooker's  Peakes,  through  which  the  Canadian  emigrants, 
and  the  fur  traders  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  annually  pass,  in 
their  journeying  from  Canada,  to  the  lower  settlements  in  Oregon.  As 
this  route  is  very  seldom,  if  ever,  traveled  by  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  it  is  not  deemed  important,  to  enlarge  in  its  description.  I  shall, 
therefore,  proceed  to  the  description  of  that  lying  through  the  great  south- 
ern pass,  near  latitude  42  degrees  north.  Upon  this  route,  the  emigrant 
sets  out  from  Independence,  Mo.,  and  travels  thence,  five  or  six  days,  in 
a  direction,  about  west  by  north,  to  the  Kansas  or  Caw  river,  crossing 
which,  he  proceeds  thence  northwest,  about  five  days,  to  the  Platte 
river ;  thence  continuing  up  the  Plat-te,  upon  the  south  side,  to  the  junc- 
tion of  its  north  and  south  forks,  thence  up  the  south  fork,  on  the  south 
side,  one  day,  to  the  usual  ford ;  where  crossing  the  river,  and  continuing 
thence,  in  a  direction  about  northwest  by  north,  three  days,  to  the  north 
fork ;  thence  up  the  north  fork  about  four  days,  to  Fort  Larimie,  and  Fort 
John.  Leaving  these  forts,  the  emigrant  pursues  a  course,  about  west  by 
north,  over  the  Black  hills,  seven  days,  to  Sweet- water,  near  Independence 
rock ;  thence  up  Sweet-water,  nine  days,  to  Little  Sandy ;  thence  west  by 


TO    OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  135 

north  four  days,  to  Green  river,  or  the  Colorado  of  the  west.  Crossing 
Green  river,  and  continuing  thence,  down  it  three  days;  thence  west, 
one  day,  to  Ham's  fork,  which  is  a  branch  o-f  Green  river ;  thence  up 
Ham's  fork,  three  days  ;  thence  west  by  north,  one  day,  to  Muddy 
river,  which  is  a  branch  of  Bear  river;  thence  down  Muddy  and  Bear 
rivers,  three  days,  to  the  soda  springs ;  thence  north  northwest  up  the 
valley,  two  days  ;  and  thence  west  over  the  high  lands  one  day,  to  Fort 
Hall!  From  this  fort,  those  who  go  to  Oregon,  continue  down  Lewis' 
river,  fifteen  days,  to  Fort  Wallawalla ;  and  thence  down  the  Columbia, 
ten  days,  to  the  lower  settlement  in  Oregon.  Those  who  go  to  California, 
travel  from  Fort  Hall,  west  southwest  about  fifteen  days,  to  the  northern 
pass,  in  the  California  mountains  ;  thence,  three  days,  to  the  Sacramento ; 
and  thence,  seven  days,  down  the  Sacramento,  to  the  bay  of  St.  Fran- 
cisco, in  California.  The  former  part  of  this  route,  is  but  one  vast 
concatenation  of  plains  and  prairies,  of  almost  unbounded  extent.  The 
entire  country,  from  Independence  to  Fort  Larimie,  is  a  vast  plain,  en- 
tirely destitute  of  timber,  with  the  exception  of  the  small  portions  occa- 
sionally found  upon,  and  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  streams.  The 
principal  timber,  found  upon  all  this  portion  of  the  route,  is  found  upon 
the  Kansas  or  Caw  river,  and  its  tributaries  ;  bei^ides  which,  there  is  very 
little  found  even  upon  the  streams.  No  scarcity  of  timber  for  fuel,  is  ex- 
perienced, until  you  arrive  upon  the  Platte ;  when,  for  the  first  time,  you 
are  reduced  to  the  necessity,  of  substituting  the  excrement  of  the  buffalo 
for  fuel,  which  you  are  under  the  necessity  of  doing,  the  greater  part  of 
the  distance,  this  side  of  the  mountains,  and,  for  considerable  distance, 
after  crossing  the  mountains.  From  Independence,  to  Fort  Larimie,  no 
serious  obstructions  are  found ;  as  upon  all  this  part  of  the  route,  you 
cros-s  neither  mountains,  nor  unfordable  streams.  The  Kansas,  and 
the  south  fork  of  the  Platte,  are  the  only  streams  of  any  importance, 
which  are  crossed  upon  this  portion  of  the  route ;  and  they  are,  always, 
very  readily  forded,  at  the  season  of  the  year  at  which  emigrants  pass 
through  that  region.  The  buffalo  are  usually  seen  upon  this  portion  of 
the  route,  about  fifteen  days'drive  from  the  States  ;  but  they  are  also  found, 
some  seasons,  within  ten  days'  drive  from  the  States;  while,  at  other 
seasons,  they  are  not  found,  within  twenty  days'  drive.  This,  however, 
depends  much  upon  the  forwardness,  or  backwardness  of  the  season,  and 
the  fact,  of  their  having  been  hunted  by  the  Indians,  who  inhabit  that 
region.  If  the  season  is  backward,  they  will  not  have  migrated  from 
the  south,  as  early  as  the  season,  at  which  emigrants  pass  through  that 
country;  and  if  they  have  come  out  upon  their  northern  migratory  tour, 
in  time  for  t'he  emigrants,  it  frequently  happens,  that  the  Indians  of  that 
section  hunt  them  to  such  an  extent,  that  they  are  completely  dispersed 
from  all  that  region.  The  bufl^alo  are  also,  generally  found  upon  all  por- 
tions of  this  route,  from  the  Platte  to  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  even,  for 
several  hundred  miles  west  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  both  in  Oregon 
and  California ;  and  wherever  they  are  found,  they  are  always  seen  in 
the  greatest  abundance,  and  are  killed  with  the  greatest  facility.  Th.8 
only  hostile  Indians,  that  are  seen  between  the  States  and  Fort  Larimie, 
are  the  Pawnees,  who  are  a  powerful  and  warlike  tribe,  and  who  are, 
generally,  very  troublesome  to  the  emigrants  ;  yet  they  are,  generally 
south  of  this  route,  at  the  season,  at  which  emigrants  pass  through  that 
portion  of  the  country.     The  Cumanches,  and  the  Sioux  sometimes  visit 


136  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

this  region,  but  ihey  are,  very  seldom  here  met  by  emigrants ;  yet  there 
are  several  other  tribes,  inhabiting  and  visiting  this  portion  of  the  coun- 
try, which,  although  much  less  powerful  and  warlike,  are,  at  times,  very 
troublesome  to  emigrants  and  others.  Fort  Larimie  is  situated  on  Lari- 
mie's  fork  of  the  Platte,  about  seven  hundred  miles  from  Independence. 
About  one  mile  south  from  this  fort,  there  is,  also,  another  fort,  which  is 
called.  Fort  John ,  and  which  is  situated  near  the  same  river.  These 
forts  are  constructed,  in  a  manner,  quite  similar  to  Fort  Hall,  which  has 
been  before  described  ;  and  they  are  occupied  by  traders  and  trappers,  for 
similar  purposes.  The  trade,  at  these  forts,  is  entirely  with  the  Indians, 
which  consists  in  the  exchange  of  dry  goods,  provisions,  guns,  ammuni- 
tion, blankets,  and  whiskey,  for  furs,  buffalo  robes,  buffalo  beef,  and 
horses ;  in  which,  both  of  these  establishments  appear  to  be  doing  a  very 
extensive  and  lucrative  business.  The  gentlemen  of  these  forts,  are  the 
first  white  persons,  with  whom  the  emigrants  meet,  after  leaving  the 
States,  unless  they  chance  to  meet  with  companies  of  traders  and  trappers, 
on  their  way  to  the  States. 

From  these  forts,  to  Fort  Hall,  a  distance  of  about  six  hundred  miles, 
the  country  through  which  the  route  lies,  is,  generally,  very  hilly  and 
mountainous.  The  former  part  of  this  portion,  includes  that  section  of 
country,  denominated  the  Black  hills,  which  present  a  very  extraordinary 
appearance.  When  viewed  from  an  elevated  position,  they  present  one 
interminous  succession  of  treeless,  shrubless,  rolling  swells  and  hills, 
which  much  resemble  the  rolling  billows  of  a  tempestuous  ocean.  Trav- 
eling over  these  hills,  is  attended  with  much  inconvenience  and  fatigue ; 
as  it  is  but  one  continued  scene  of  alternate  ascension  and  decension,  from 
morning  until  night,  for  several  days  in  succession,  and  until  we  arrive 
at  Independence  rock,  which,  from  its  peculiarity  and  notoriety,  requires 
a  passing  notice.  It  is  situated  near  Sweet-water,  about  one  hundred  rods 
from  the  ordinary  encampment,  upon  that  stream.  It  is  composed  of  solid 
granite,  covering  an  area  of  about  five  acres,  and  rising  in  conical 
form,  about  four  hundred  feet,  above  the  level  of  the  surrounding  country; 
it  is  seen  at  a  great  distance,  and,  hence,  serves  as  a  land  mark,  both  for 
the  mountaineer  and  the  emigrant.  Many  portions  of  this  extraordinary 
rock,  present  an  extensive,  perpendicular,  smooth  surface,  upon  which  the 
various  trappers  and  others,  who  have  passed  through  that  region,  have 
inscribed  their  names,  the  numbers  of  their  parties,  and  the  date  of  their 
passing.  The  first  party,  which  noticed  this  singular  rock,  in  this  man- 
ner, was  a  party  of  American  trappers,  who  chanced  to  pass  that  way, 
upon  the  fourth  day  of  July,  when,  wishing  to  be  Americans,  even  in 
that  secluded  region  of  aboriginal  barbarism,  they  proceeded  to  celebrate 
that  great  day,  which  gave  birth  to  human  liberty.  This  they  did,  by  a 
succession  of  mountain  revelings,  festivities,  and  hilarities,  which  having 
been  concluded,  they  all  inscribed  their  names,  together  with  the  word 
"  Independence,"  upon  the  most  prominent,  and  conspicious  portions  of 
the  rock  ;  hence  its  name  and  notoriety,  which  are  as  firmly  established, 
by  that  act,  as  that  rock  of  ages  itself  Independence  rock,  thus  conse- 
crated, is  destined,  in  all  coming  time,  to  stand  forth  as  an  enduring  mon- 
ument to  civil  liberty,  and  American  Independence!  A  greater  part  of 
the  distance,  from  Independence  rock  to  Green  river,  is  comparatively, 
level,  and  affords  a  very  eligible  wagon  way  ;  but  from  that  river  to  Fort 
Hall,  is  the  most  broken  and  mountainous  portion  of  the  entire  route. 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  137  \ 

All  this  portion  of  the  route,  from  Fort  Larimie  to  Fort  Hall,  like  that 
east  of  Fort  Larimie,  is,  usually,  entirely  destitute  of  timber,  but  as  a 
general  thing,  sufficient  is  found  for  fuel.  On  this  portion  of  the  route, 
buffalo  are  very  seldom  found  west  of  Green  river,  but  they  are  very 
abundant,  between  that  river,  and  Fort  Larimie,  especially  upon  Sweet- 
water, and  in  the  vicinity  of  Independence  rock ;  and  they  are,  also,  very 
numerous  off  the  route,  west  of  Green  river,  and  even  west  of  Fort  Hall, 
both  in  Oregon  and  California.  The  only  hostile  Indians,  with  whom 
emigrants  meet  upon  this  portion  of  the  route,  are  the  Sioux,  the  Shyanes, 
and  Eutaws  ,  yet  these  are  not  called  hostile,  by  mountaineers  ;  of  this, 
however,  the  reader,  will  be  enabled  to  judge,  for  himself,  from  what  has 
been  said  upon  a  former  page.  The  Sioux,  particularly,  can,  scarcely, 
be  thought  to  be  friendly,  if  we  judge  them  by  their  acts  ;  the  making  of 
myself  and  Mr.  Lovejoy,  prisoners  of  war,  and  the  robbing  of  our  hun- 
ters, whenever  an  opportunity  presented ,  to  say  the  least,  were  not  very 
strong  indications  of  friendship. 

From  Fort  Hall  to  the  Pacific,  by  the  Oregon  route,  a  distance  of  about 
eight  hundred  miles,  there  is  but  one  continued  succession  of  high  moun- 
tains, stupendous  cliffs,  and  deep,  frightful  caverns,  with  an  occasional  lim- 
ited valley.  There  is  much  less  difficulty,  in  obtaining  wood  for  fuel, 
upon  this  portion  of  the  route ;  yet  there  are  many  places  below  Fort 
Boisia,  where  wood,  for  fuel,  can  not  be  obtained,  only  as  it  is  purchased 
of  the  Indians,  who  always  take  immediate  possession  of  every  stick, 
which  they  find,  either  upon  the  shores,  or  floating  down  the  streams. 
Although  the  Indians  appear  inclined  to  monopolize  the  entire  wood 
trade,  yet  the  course,  which  they  pursue,  is  highly  serviceable  to  the  em- 
igrants; for,  if  they  were  here  left  to  their  own  resources  entirely,  they 
would  be  unabled  to  procure,  either  wood,  or  the  excrement  of  the  buffalo. 
From  the  dalles  to  the  Pacific,  there  is  ample  timber,  as  much  of  the 
country  is  covered  with  dense  forests.  This  portion  of  the  Oregon  route, 
from  Fort  Hall  to  the  Pacific,  has  always  been  considered,  wholly  impas- 
sable for  wagons,  or  any  other  vehicles  ;  yet  it  is  said,  that  the  emigrants  ^ 
of  1843,  succeeded  in  getting  their  wagons  entirely  down  to  the  Wallam- 
mette  settlement.  This  they  may  have  done  ,  but  I  am  confident,  from 
my  own  experience,  that  each  wagon  must  have  cost  the  owner  of  it,  more 
time  and  labor,  than  five  wagons  aroAvorth.  even  in  Oregon.  By  recent 
explorations,  however,  a  very  good,  and  much  more  direct  wagon  way, 
has  been  found,  about  one  hundred  miles,  southward  from  the  great  south- 
ern pass,  which,  it  will  be  observed,  lies  principally  through  the  northern 
part  of  California.  The  California  route,  from  Fort  Hall  to  the  Sacra- 
mento river,  lies  through  alternate  plains,  prairies  and  valleys,  and  over 
hills,  amid  lofty  mountains  ;  thence  down  the  great  valley  of  the  Sacra- 
mento, to  the  bay  of  St.  Francisco,  a  distance  from  Fort  Hall,  of  nine 
hundred  miles.  The  Indians  are,  in  many  places,  very  numerous ;  yet 
they  are  extremely  timid,  and  entirely  inoffensive.  Wagons  can  be  as 
readily  taken  from  Fort  Hall  to  the  bay  of  St.  Francisco,  as  they  can, 
from  the  States  to  Fort  Hall ;  and,  in  fact,  the  latter  part  of  the  route,  is 
found  much  more  eligible  for  a  wagon  way,  than  the  former.  The  moct 
direct  route,  for  the  California  emigrants,  would  be  to  leave  the  Oregon  i 

route,  about  two  hundred  miles  east  from  Fort  Hall ;  thence  bearing  wes* 
southwest,  to  the  Salt  lake ;  and  thence  continuing  down  to  the  bay  of 
17 


138  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

St.  Francisco,  by  the  route  just  described.  The  emigrants,  up  to  this 
time,  however,  have  traveled  together,  as  far  as  Fort  Hall,  because  of  this 
being  the  only  settlement,  in  that  vicinity,  at  which  they  are  enabled  to  pro- 
cure horses,  and  provisions.  The  soda  springs,  however,  will,  undoubted- 
ly, be  found  to  be  the  point,  at  which  the  routes  will  most  advantageously 
diverge,  both  in  reference  to  directness,  and  to  the  obtaining  of  supplies ; 
for  there  is  no  doubt,  but  that  a  town,  of  very  considerable  importance, 
will  spring  up,  at  that  point,  in  a  very  few  years.  The  entire  distance  by 
this  route,  from  Independence,  either  to  Oregon  or  California,  is  about 
twenty-one  hundred  miles ;  and  the  usual  time  required  in  performing  the 
'journey,  to  either  of  those  countries,  will  be  found  to  be  about  one  hundred 
and  twenty  days,  exclusive  of  delays  ;  yet  the  great  disadvantages,  under 
which  parties  have,  heretofore,  labored,  have  caused  them  to  occupy  much 
more  time,  than  that  above  stated,  in  performing  the  journey.  It  is  a  surpri- 
sing fact,  that  upon  this  entire  route,  from  the  States,  either  to  Oregon  or 
California,  there  is  not  a  stream  that  emigrants  cross,  but  that  is  fordable, 
at  the  season  of  the  year,  at  which  they  pass  through  those  regions.  A 
much  better  way,  is  generally  found,  the  entire  extent  of  this  route,  than 
can  be  found,  in  any  portion  of  our  western  States,  the  same  distance,  es- 
pecially from  the  States  to  California,  by  the  route  just  described. 

The  route,  which  I  propose  next  briefly  to  notice,  is  that  lying  through 
the  pass  before  described,  which  is  situated,  at  latitude  34  deg.  north. — 
This  route  is  that  usually  traveled,  by  the  Santa  Fe  traders  and  Mexi- 
can emigrants,  as  well  as  emigrants  from  our  southern  States.  Because 
of  the  very  little  importance  of  this  route  to  our  people,  at  present,  it  is 
not  deemed  proper  to  detain  the  reader,  with  a  detailed  description.  Al- 
though this  route  is  now  deemed,  rather  unimportant  to  citizens  of  the 
United  States,  yet,  if  the  time  ever  comes,  when  the  intermediate  country, 
shall  belong  to  a  civilized  people,  this  route  will  become  of  the  greatest 
importance,  especially  to  the  southern  emigrants  and  travelers,  who, 
traveling  almost  directly  west,  would  save  all  the  distance  to  Indepen- 
dence, the  present  place  of  rendezvous.  Until  that  happy  event,  no  fur- 
ther description  need  be  given  of  this  route;  as,because  of  the  inveterate 
suspicion  and  animosity,  which  the  inhabitants  of  that  region,  now  enter- 
tain, of  all  foreigners,  it  is  almost  impossible  for  them  to  pass  through 
that  country,  with  any  degree  of  safety.  Foreigners,  in  traveling  by 
this  route,  are  not  only  subject  to  the  serious  effects,  arising  from  the  sus- 
picion and  animosity  of  the  Mexicans,  but  they  are  also,  subject,  to  the 
serious  and  dangerous  consequences  arising  from  their  innate  thievish 
and  murderous  propensities. 

The  route,  by  way  of  Vera  Cruz,  is  among  the  most  important  routes 
to  those  countries,  and  hence,  will  require  a  more  particular  notice.  The 
emigrant,  who  travels  by  this  route,  ships,  at  New  Orleans,  for  Vera 
Cruz,  where,  if  he  sails  from  New  Orleans,  he  arrives  in  seven  or  eight 
days ;  thence  by  stage,  three  days,  to  the  city  of  Mexico:  thence  by 
stage,  six  days,  to  Guadalaxara;  thence  on  horseback,  five  days,  to 
Topic ;  thence  fon  horseback,  two  days,  to  St.  Bias ;  thence,  by  water, 
twelve  days,  to  California,  or  twenty  days  to  Oregon.  By  adding  about 
the  same  time,  as  that  above  stated,  for  delays,  we  will  have,  very  nearly, 
the  time  required,  in  performing  the  journey  to  Oregon  or  California,  by 
this  route,  which  will  be  found  to  be,  about  one  month  and  a  half,  to  the 
former  place,  and  about  one  month  and  six  days,  to  the  latter  place.— 


TO   OREGON  AND   CALIFORNIA.  139 

This  is  the  route,  by  which  I  returned  to  the  United  States ;  but  I  was 
more  than  three  months,  in  reaching  the  States,  even  from  California ; 
yet  many  of  the  usual  delays,  may  be  avoided.  It  is  very  expensive, 
traveling  by  this  route,  the  entire  expense  being,  about  five  hundred  dol- 
lars. From  Guadalaxara,  the  traveler  is  not  only  under  the  necessity 
of  employing  servants,  and  purchasing  horses;  but  he  is  also  under  the 
necessity,  of  purchasing  and  taking  with  him,  such  provisions  as  he  re- 
quires, as  well  as  a  traveling  bed ;  for,  without  preliminary  arrangements 
of  this  kind,  he  would,  generally,  find  himself  without  food,  and  always 
without  a  bed.  The  principal  dangers,  to  which  travelers  are  exposed, 
in  passing  through  that  country,  are  those  of  being  robbed, and  insulted 
or  murdered,  because  of  their  non-conformity  to  the  prevailing  religious 
ceremonies,  in  which,  all  things  else,  appear  to  be  wholly  absorbed. — 
Robberies  are,  most  frequently,  committed  between  the  city  of  Mexico 
and  Vera  Cruz,  which  is  owing  to  the  opinion,  which  prevails  among 
the  people,  that  upon  the  arrival  of  foreigners  into  their  country,  they 
necessarily  have  money  in  their  possession ;  and  so  upon  their  departure, 
the  impression  is,  that  they  have  collected  their  money,  and  other  prop- 
erty ;  and  hence,  that  is  the  most  lucrative  field  for  robbers,  which,  it  un- 
doubtedly would  be,  were  it  not  for  the  extensive  competition.  About 
two  thirds  of  all  the  robberies,  committed  upon  this  route,  are  committed 
between  those  two  places.  There  is  no  method  of  guarding  against 
these  robbers ;  for  you  are  not  permitted  to  carry  arms,  or  what  is  tan- 
tamount to  the  same  thing,  you  are  told  by  the  Mexicans,  that  they  will 
not  travel  in  the  stage,  if  arms  are  carried ;  the  consequence  of  which  is, 
that  you  are  under  the  necessity,  either  of  taking  all  of  the  seats  in  the 
stage  yourself,  or  disposing  of  your  arms,  the  latter  of  which  courses,  you 
would  be  most  likely  to  pursue.  Having  disposed  of  his  arms,  the  tra- 
veler, proceeds  upon  his  dangerous  journey,  throwing  himself  upon  the 
mercy,  of  a  merciless  bandit,  of  wreckless  robbers,  he  perfectly  reconciles 
himself  to  his  fate,  expects  nothing  else  than  to  be  robbed,  and  he  is  very 
seldom  disappointed.  The  stage  is  seldom  robbed,  less  frequently,  than 
twice  or  thrice  a  week  ;  and  passengers  are,  very  frequently,  shot  from  the 
box,  as  they  are  riding  with  the  driver,  especially  if  they  are  foreigners. 
Several  graves  are  seen,  by  the  road  side,  in  one  day's  travel,  of  foreigners, 
who  have  been  thus  shot  from  the  box,  or  otherwise  killed,  in  their  attempt, 
to  resist  the  attack  of  the  robbers,  which,  by  the  by,  is  a  very  dangerous 
undertaking,  unless  there  are  several  foreigners  together.  These  rob- 
bers, thus  rob  and  kill,  without  regard  to  persons,  or  to  personages,  it 
seems,  for  our  ministers  do  not  escape  their  avaricious  grasp.  The  only 
security,  which  travelers  have  against  the  ravages  and  outrages,  of  this 
community  of  thieves,  is,  to  travel  in  numbers  sufficient  to  insure  their 
own  protection ;  for  which  purpose,  four  or  five  foreigners,  well  armed, 
are  amply  sufficient. 

An  armed  escort  of  about  fifteen  soldiers,  is  furnished  by  the  govern- 
ment, ostensibly  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  travelers  ;  yet  this  escort 
is,  always,  composed  of  the  most  wreckless,  and  efficient  robbers  of  the 
whole  land.  These  soldiers  always  travel  with  the  stage,  on  horseback, 
for  which  service  they  are  not  only  paid  by  the  government,  but  also  by 
the  passengers ;  yet  their  innate  ungratefulness,  treachery  and  cowardice, 
are  fully  displayed,  upon  the  approach  of  the  robbers,  when  they,  at 
once,  flee  for  their  own  security,  and  leave  the  passengers,  to  the  mercy 


r 


140  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

of  a  horde  of  inhuman  banditti.  Several  instances  of  this  kind,  were 
related  to  me,  by  the  drivers,  who  are  generally  Americans,  and  who,  by 
the  by,  are  very  kind,  jovial  fellows.  One  of  these  drivers  informed  me, 
as  an  extraordinary  instance  of  this  kind,  that  in  driving  the  stage  from 
the  city  of  Mexico  to  Vera  Cruz,  he  was  attacked  by  a  band  of  robbers, 
who  ordered  him  to  dismount,  and  hold  his  horses,  and  at  the  same  time, 
ordered  the  escort  to  secure  a  retreat,  while  it  was  practicable ;  both  of 
which  commands,  were  readily  obeyed,  when  the  robbers  advanced,  with 
drawn  guns,  and  swords,  and  ordered  the  passengers  to  prostrate  them- 
selves, one  by  one,  upon  the  ground,  with  their  faces  downward,  which, 
as  thev  were  unarmed,  they,  of  course,  readily  did ;  when  the  robbers 
immediately  proceeded,  to  break  open  their  trunks,  and  valises,  and  to 
search  their  persons.  Having  done  which,  and  having  secured  all  the 
money,  and  other  valuable  property,  of  those  who  were  fortunate  enough 
to  have  either,  and  most  cruelly,  and  inhumanly  beating  those,  who  had 
neither,  they  then  ordered,  their  impoverished  victims,  to  prepare  for  their 
departure,  which  they  did,  with  very  little  delay.  The  brave  escorts, 
observing  this,  now  gallopped  up,  and  demanded  a  portion  of  the  spoils, 
a  part  of  which,  they  said,  they  were  entided  to,  as  they  had  given  way, 
in  order  to  enable  the  robbers,  to  accomplish  their  criminal  purposes. 
But  the  robbers  having  the  organs  of  acquisitiveness,  and  destructiveness, 
equally  as  fully  developed  as  the  brave  escort,  and  having  the  possession, 
had  greatly  the  advantage,  in  this  contest  for  the  spoils ;  being  aware  of 
which,  they  now  ordered  the  government  robbers^  to  desist  in  their  con- 
test for  the  spoils,  and  to  avail  themselves  of  a  speedy  flight ;  and  there- 
by, save  their  lives,  which  they  were  assured,  any  further  contest  would 
greatly  jeopardize.  Knowing  that  there  was  much  more  "  truth  than 
poetry"  in  the  ^hoxe,  i\ie  government  robbers,  now,  immediately  made 
good  their  retreat ;  and  thus,  the  illegal  succeeded,  and  triumphed  over 
the  legal  robbers.  There  really  appears  to  be  a  connivance,  at  these  re- 
peated, and  wanton  robberies,  by  a  great  majority  of  all  the  Mexican  peo- 
ple ;  of  which,  I  was  fully  convinced,  by  numerous  instances,  which 
were  related  to  me,  by  several  gentlemen,  both  foreigners  and  Mexicans, 
of  Mexican  gentlemeiH s,  being  stationed  at  the  various  public  houses, 
whose  duty  it  is,  to  keep  the  operatives  in  villainy  and  crime,  duly  ad- 
vised of  all  favorable  opportunities,  which  may  present,  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  their  sinful  purposes. 

The  greatest  dangers,  to  which  foreigners  are  exposed,  in  traveling  by 
this  route,  are  those  of  being  insulted  or  murdered,  for  a  non-observance 
of  the  interminable,  and  extremely  annoying  religious  ceremonies,  with 
which  they  are  everywhere  surrounded.  At  the  ringing  of  a  certain  bell, 
or  rather  a  volley  of  ringing,  from  scores  of  bells,  which  occurs  about 
eleven  o'clock,  of  each  day,  all  things  human,  everywhere  in  view,  as 
well  as  many  things  that  do  not  appear  to  be  exactly  human,  fall  upon 
their  knees,  where  they  remain  for  a  few  minutes,  uncovered,  when  they 
are  permitted  again  to  engage  in  their  ordinary  avocations.  Upon  the 
passing  of  a  certain  "black  coach,"  which  is  called  by  the  foreigners,  in 
derision,  the  "gocart,"  which  is  said  to  contain  the  "Holy  Ghost,"  all 
persons,  whether  male  or  female,  black  or  white,  brown  or  yellov/,  pros- 
trate themselves  in  a  proper  attitude  of  man  worship,  and  thus  remain 
upon  their  knees,  whether  in  the  mud,  or  on  the  pavement,  until  the  sa- 
cerdotal corps,  shall  have  passed  away  ;  when  they  retire  to  their  respec- 


\. 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  141 

live  places  of  abode,  business,  amusement  or  lounging,  amia  the  most  con- 
fused and  tremendous  thunderings,  of  liundrcds  of  bells,  which  are  now 
tossed  and  thrown  with  unusual  energy.  Tlie  black  vehicle,  above  allu- 
ded to,  instead  of  containing  the  "  Holy  Ghost,"  as  said,  contains  nothing 
more  nor  less,  than  oiie  of  those  superhuman  dignitaries  in  black,  wlio  is 
said  to  be  on  his  way,  to  the  residence  of  some  person,  who  is  very  ill, 
with  the  view  of  administering  to  him,  the  last  propitiatory,  clerical  aid. 
Because  of  the  non-conformitv  of  the  foreigners,  to  these  unmeaning,  su- 
perstitious ceremonies,  of  this  priest  ridden  people,  they  are  very  fre- 
quently publicly  and  grossly  insulted,  knocked  down  in  the  streets,  and 
even  killed.  Numerous  instances  of  foreigners'  having  been  slain,  for  the 
<tbove  reason  have,  frequently,  occurred  in  all  the  different  portions  of 
that  country,  rmd,  even,  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  A  short  time  since,  a 
countryman  of  ours,  was  inhumanly,  butchered  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  al- 
though he  was  kneeling,  in  conformity  to  the  above  superstitious  practice. 
Being  a  shoe-maker,  he  was  in  his  shop,  engaged  at  his  business,  when 
ne  was  informed  by  a  Mexican,  that  the  "Holy  Ghost"  was  passing,  and 
understanding,  that  he  was  desired  to  do  reverence  to  the  "man  in  black,'* 
he  arose,  and  knelt  upon  his  seat;  but  he  was  informed,  by  the  Mexican, 
tliat  he"  must  come  entirely  out  of  his  room,  and  kneel  in  the  street.  As 
he  did  not,  immediately,  comply  with  this  request,  but  remained  kneeling 
in  his  room,  the  Mexican  rushed  upon  him  ,  stabbed  him  to  the  heart, 
and  laid  him  at  his  feet,a  lifeless  corpse,  an  unoffending  victim  of  barba- 
rous superstition,  and  tyrannical  priestcraft.  The  foreigners,  being  nmch 
exasperated,  at  this  atrocious  act  of  barbarous  inhumanity,  held  a  public 
meeting  in  reference  to  it,  but  being  interrupted  by  the  rabble,  they  were 
soon  com|.)elled  to  disperse,  not,  however,  until  they  had  made  arrange- 
ments for  the  interment  of  the  body,  which  they,  immediately,  proceeded 
to  do;  but  as  they  were  moving  in  solemn  procession  to  the  grave,  they 
were  assailed  by  a  mob,  with  clubs,  brick  bats,  and  all  manner  of  deadly 
missels.  So  furious  was  the  assault  upon  them,  that  they  were  under  the 
necessity,  of  leaving  the  corpse  in  the  street,  and  applying  to  the  civil  au- 
thorities for  protection.  A  few  soldiers  were  now  sent  to  their  aid, 
when  they  again  moved  on  to  the  grave,  where,  as  they  were  in.  the  act 
of  performing  the  ordinary  religious  rites,  they  were  again  assailed,  and 
driven  from  their  purpose ;  but  finally,  the  mob  was  partially  dispersed, 
when,  availing  themselves  of  the  favorableness  of  the  moment,  they,  in 
great  haste  and  confusion,  consummated  the  interment,  and  immediately 
retired,  in  order  to  secure  their  own  personal  safety.  These  are  a  few 
among  the  many  dangers,  to  which  foreigners  are  exposed,  in  traveling  by 
this  route,  as  well  as  a  few^  among  the  numerous  instances,  that  might  be 
given,  of  the  enormous  evils  and  oppressions,  whic}}..^necessari}y  arise» 
from  unrestrained  priestcraft  and  religious  intolerance. 

The  route  by  sea,  is  the  well  known  route  around  Cape  Horn,  by 
which  there  is,  latterly,  very  extensive  travel  to  those  countries,  border- 
ing upon  the  Pacific  ocean.  Opportunities  are,  annually,  presented  of 
obtaining  passage,  by  this  route,  either  from  Boston  or  New  York,  to 
Oregon,  California,  or  the  Sandwich  Islands ;  and  passage  is  readily  ob- 
tained, from  either  of  the  latter  places,  to  the  other,  twice  or  thrice,  annu- 
ally. Those  wishing  to  return,  from  either  Oregon  or  California,  to  the 
States,  find  very  frequent  opportunities,  as  vessels  sail,  frequently,  each 
season  from  both  those  countries,  to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  from  which 


142  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

place,  passage  can  be  obtained,  at  almost  any  time,  to  Boston  or  New 
York,  ancl  as  vessels  sail  regularly,  every  autumn,  from  Oregon  to  Cali- 
fornia, and  from  California  to  the  States.  The  latter  opportunity,  can  be 
the  more  certainly  relied  upon,  as  the  arrangements  of  the  merchant  ves- 
sels are  such,  that  several  of  them  arrive  and  depart  annually.  Leaving 
Boston  or  'New  York,  in  the  month  of  August  or  September,  they  arrive 
in  California,  in  the  month  of  December  or  January  ;  and  on  their  return 
to  the  States,  they  leave  California,  in  the  month  of  November  or  De- 
cember, and  arrive  at  Boston  or  New- York,  in  February  or  March.  The 
usual  time  required,  by  this  route,  is  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  days  ; 
and  the  expense  is  about  three  hundred  dollars,  exclusive  of  all  expenses, 
previous  to  departure.  The  doubling  of  Cape  Horn,  was,  formerly  con- 
sidered a  very  hazardous  undertaking ;  latterly,  however,  it  is  not  so  con- 
sidered, by  experienced  navigators.  The  greatest  objections,  which  can 
b|  urged  against  traveling  by  this  route,  are  the  unpleasant,  cheerless  mo- 
notony ,and  the  irksome  confinement,  incident  to  this  method  of  traveling. 
Now,  having  taken  this  cursory  view  of  the  different  routes,  perhaps  it 
would  not  be  uninteresting  to  the  reader,  to  briefly  examine,  the  compar- 
ative advantages,  and  disadvantages,  of  each,  in  reference  to  safety,  time 
and  expense.  Upon  a  full  review  of  this  subject,  we  shall  find  that  the 
route,  lying  through  the  southern  pass,  near  latitude  42°  north  has  a  de- 
cided preference,  in  all  the  above  particulars.  It  will  be  observed,  that 
traveling  by  this  route,  is  much  less  hazardous,  that  but  about  the  same 
time  is  required  as  in  traveling  by  the  route  by  sea,  and  very  little  more 
than  is  required,  in  traveling  by  the  route,  by  the  way  of  Vera  Cruz  and 
the  city  of  Mexico;  and  that  the  expense  is  much  less,  by  this  route, 
than  by  either  of  the  others,  must  be  very  evident.  As  nothing  is  requir- 
ed upon  this  route,  but  such  teams  and  provisions,  as  the  farmer  must  ne- 
cessarily have  at  home,  it  may  be  truly  said,  that  it  costs  him  nothing  but 
his  time  ;  for  he  can  expend  no  money,  as  he  travels  entirely  among  tribes 
of  barbarous  Indians,  who  know  nothing  of  money  or  its  value. 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  143 


CHAPTER   XV. 

THE  EQUIPMENT,  SUPPLIES,  AND  THE  METHOD  OF 

TRAVELING. 

Equipment;  kinds  of  arms;  quantity  of  ammunition.  Supplies;  quantity 
of  provisions;  kinds  of  Biifjalo.  not  depended  upon.  Advisable  to  drive 
cattle.  Cooking  utensils;  Jew  io  be  taken.  Beds;  kind  of  preferred. 
Horses  preferred,  for  ike  saddle.  Mvles  preferable  for  the  harness.  Ox- 
en preferred  to  horses  or  m.ules.  Working  cows;  not  advised.  Good  wag- 
ons should  be  selected.  What  horses  arid  mules  to  be  shod.  Additional 
supplies;  what  to  be  taken.  Method  of  traveling.  Place  of  re7idezvous; 
time  of  arriving  at;  time  of  departure  from..  Organization.  Forming 
of  an  elliptical  '■'"  caraV  Mid-day  encampment.  Forming  a  square  ^'ca- 
raV^  Nocturnal  encampmeuL  Method  of  guarding  camp;  of  guarding 
herds.  Territory  of  hostile  Indians  ;  extent  of;  method  of  traveling  in. 
Defensive  attitude;  method  of  assuming.  Horses,  not  turned  out.  Day 
and  night  guards;  duty  of  Fires  extinguished.  Elk  in  human  form. 
Indians  mimicing  wolves.  Gims  carried  loaded.^  bid  not  capped,  or  primed. 
Horses  in  chase  of  buffalo  withoiU  riders.  Large  com/jjanies  objectionable. 
Difficulties  and  dangers  avoidable.     Recapitulation.     Conclusion. 

In  treating  of  the  equipment,  supplies,  and  the  method  of  traveling,  I 
shall  confine  my  remarks,  entirely,  to  the  over  land  route,  which  lies 
through  the  great  southern  pass;  as  the  chief  emigration,  to  those  coun- 
tries, is,  at  this  time,  by  that  route,  which  from  present  indications,  is 
destined  to  become  the  great  thoroughfare,  between  the  States,  and  both 
Oregon  and  California.  All  persons,  designing  to  travel  by  this  route, 
should,  invariably,  equip  themselves  with  a  good  gun ;  at  least,  five  pounds 
of  powder,  and  twenty  pounds  of  lead  ;  in  addition  to  which,  it  might 
be  advisable,  also,  for  each  to  provide  himself  with  a  holster  of  good  pis- 
tols, which  would,  always,  be  found  of  very  great  service,  yet  they  are 
not  indispensable.  If  pistols  are  taken,  an  additional  supply  of  ammuni- 
tion should,  also,  be  taken ;  for,  it  almost  necessarily  follows,  that  the 
more  firearms  you  have,  the  more  ammunition  you  will  require,  whether 
assailed  by  the  Indians,  or  assailing  the  buffalo.  If  you  come  in  contact 
with  the  latter,  you  will  find  the  pistols  of  the  greatest  importance  ;  for 
you  may  gollop  your  horse,  side  by  side,  with  them,  and  having  pistols, 
you  may  shoot  them  down  at  your  pleasure ;  but  should  you  come  in 
mortal  conflict  with  the  former,  the  rifle  will  be  found  to  be  much  more 
effective,  and  terrific ;  the  very  presence  of  which,  always,  affords  ample 
security.  Being  rovided  with  arms  and  ammunition,  as  above  sug- 
gested, the  emign  nt  may  consider  himself,  as  far  as  his  equipment  is  con- 
cerned, prepared,  for  any  warlike  emergency,  especially,  if  nature  has,  al- 
so, equipped  him  with  the  requisite  energy  and  courage. 

In  procuring  supplies  for  this  journey,  the  emigrant  should  provide 
himself  with,  at  least,  two  hundred  pounds  of  flour,  or  meal ;  one  hun 
dred  and  fifty  pounds  of  bacon  ;  ten  pounds  of  coffee  ;  twenty  pounds  of 
sugar ;  and  ten  pounds  of  salt,  with  such  other  provisions  as  he  ma 
prefer,  and  can  conveniently  take ;  yet  the  provisions,  above  enumerate 


* 


144  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

arc  considered  ample,  both  as  to  quantity,  and  variety.  It  would,  per 
haps,  be  advisable  for  emigrants,  not  to  encumber  themselves  with  anj 
other,  than  those  just  enumerated ;  as  it  is  impracticable  for  them,  lo 
lake  all  the  luxuries,  to  which  they  have  been  accustomed  ;  and  as  it  is 
found,  by  experience,  that,  when  upon  this  kind  of  expedition,  they  are 
not  desired,  even  by  the  most  devoted  epicurean.  The  above  remarks, 
in  reference  to  the  quaniity  of  provisions,  are  designed  to  apply  only  to 
adults:  but  taking  the  above  as  the  data,  parents  will  find  no  difficulty, 
in  determining  as  to  the  necessary  quantum  for  children  :  in  doing  which, 
however,  it  should  always  be  observed,  that  children  as  well  as  adults, 
require  about  twice  the  quaniity  of  provisions,  which  they  would  require 
at  home,  for  the  same  length  of  time.  This  is  attributable  to  the  fact,  of 
iheir  being  deprived  of  vegetables,  and  other  sauce,  and  their  being  con- 
fined to  meat  and  bread  alone;  as  well  as  the  fact,  of  their  being  sub- 
jected to  continued  and  regular  exercise,  in  the  open  air,  which  gives 
additional  vigor  and  strength,  whicn  greatly  improves  the  health,  and, 
therefore,  gives  an  additional  demand  for  food!  I  am  aware,  that  an 
opinion  prevails  among  many,  that  when  arriving  in  that  region  in  which 
the  buflalo  abound,  moat  can  be  very  readily  obtained,  and  hence,  much 
Ies3  meat  need  be  taken ;  but  thi«  is  an  error,  which,  unless  cautiously 
guarded  against,  will  be  very  apt  to  prove  fatal:  for  to  be  found  in  that  wikl 
and  remote  region,  depending  upon  the  buffah)  for  meat,  would,  in  nine  cases 
out  of  ten,  result  in  immediate  or  ultimate  starvation,  especially,  if  there 
should  be  a  large  body  of  persons  together.  It  is  true,  that  imm()nse 
herds  of  buflalo.  are  (ound  in  that  region  :  but  it  would  be  impossible,  to 
kill  them  in  sufhcient  numbers,  to  susinin  a  irirge  parly,  unless  many 
persons  should  devote  their  entire  attention  to  the  business  of  hunting  ; 
and,  even  then,  it  could  not  be  done,  unless  the  company  should  delny 
for  that  purpose,  which  would,  in  all  probability,  produce  consequences, 
equally  as  fatal  as  starvation;  for,  unless  you  pass  over  the  inountains 
early  in  the  fiill,  you  are  very  liable  lo  be  detained,  by  impassable  moun- 
tains of  snow,  until  the  next  spring,  or,  perhaps,  forever.  Then  it  would 
seem,  that,  although  the  buflalo  are  vastly  numerous,  they  cannot  be  re- 
lied upon  ;  yet  lo  avoid  encumbering  himself  with  the  very  large  quanti- 
ties of  meat  which  his  family  would  rcrjuire,  the  emigrant  can  drive  cat- 
tle, which  will  aObrd  him  a  very  good  substitute,  not  only  for  the  beef 
of  the  bufllilo,  but,  also,  for  bacon  ;  and  what  is  more  important,  is,  thai 
they  can  be  relied  upon,  under  all  circumstances. 

Very  few  cooking  utensils,  should  be  taken,  as  they  very  much  in- 
crease the  load,  to  avoid  which,  is  always  a  consideration  of  paramount 
importance.  A  baking-kettle,  frying-pan,  tea-kettle,  tea-pot,  and  coffee- 
pot, are  all  the  furniture  of  this  kind,  that  is  essential,  which,  together 
with  tin  plates,  tin  cups,  ordinary  knives,  forks,  spoons,  and  a  coflee-mil!, 
should  constitute  the  entire  kitchen  apparatus.  Bedding  should  consist 
of  nothing  more  than  blankets,  sheets,  coverlets  and  pillows,  which, 
being  spread  upon  a  buffalo  robe,  an  oiled  cloth,  or  some  other  impervi- 
cfus  substance,  should  constitute  the  beds,  which  are  found  much  prefera- 
ble, because  of  their  being  much  less  bulky,  and  weighty.  Feather-beds 
arc  sometimes  taken  by  the  frmilies,  but  in  many  instances,  they  find 
them,  not  only  burthensomo  and  inconvenient,  but  entirely  useless,  con- 
sequently, they  leave  them  by  the  way,  and  pursue  the  course  above 
suggested.     Our  common  horses,  are  preferable  for  the  saddle,  but  it  bo- 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALIFORNIA.  145 

mcs  necessary  to  take  such  numbers  of  tfhem,  that  they  may  be  occa- 
,:r-»nally  changed  ;  for  it  is  found  by  experience,  that  no  American  horse 
can  be  taken  entirely  through,  being  daily  ised,  either  under  the  saddJe, 
or  in  the  harness.  Many  prefer  mules  fpc  .he  saddle,  but  they  are  ob- 
jectionable, because  of  their  extreme  intractability,  and  their  inflexible 
inertness,  in  which  they  appear  to  indulge,  to  a  much  greater  extent  than 
usual,  upon  this  kind  of  expedition.  For  the  harness,  mules  are  prefer- 
able to  horses  ;  for,  notu'ithstanding  their  extreme  inertness  and  slowness, 
they  are  found  to  endure  the  fatigue,  and  to  subsist  upon  vegetation  alone, 
much  better  than  horses ;  but  oxen  are  considered  piefera hie  to  cither. 
If  mules  are  taken,  it  is  advisable  t-o  take  more  of  them,  than  are  re- 
quired for  ordinary  teams,  in  order  that  they  may  be  changed  as  occa- 
sion may  require:  for  they,  even,  frequently  become  so  fatigued,  and 
exhi;uste'd,  that  they,  like  the  horses,  are  left  by  the  way,  to  be  taken  or 
kilie-,  by  the  Indians.  Oxen  endure  the  fatigue  and  heat,  much  better 
than  'iher  horses  or  mules;  and  they  also,  subsist  much  better,  upon 
vegeta  on  alone^  as  all  herds  are,  of  course,  required  to  do,  upon  all 
portions  of  the  route.  There  is  no  instance,  within  my  knowledge,  of 
any  emigrant's  being  re([uired  to  leave  his  oxen  by  the  way,  because  of 
excessive  fatigue,  or  extreme  povertjr ;  for,  as  a  general  thing,  they  con- 
tinue to  thrive,  during  the  entire  journey.  But  there  are  other  consider- 
ations, which  give  them  a  decided  preference,  among  which  is  the  foct, 
ihat  they  are  not  liable  to  be  stolen  by  the  Indians,  who  are  aware,  that 
they  travel  so  extremely  slowly,  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  them,  to 
drive  them  so  far,  during  the  night,  that  they  could  not  be  retaken,  during 
the  next  day;  hence,  they  v.-ill  not  hazard  the  aUempt,  especiall}^  as  they 
would  be  serviceable  to  ihem,  only  as  food ;  and  as  the  country  abounds 
with  buffiilo,  and  other  game,  the  meat  of  which  they  very  mucij  prefer. 
Another  consideration,  which  gives  cattle  the  preference,  is,  that  they  do 
nof„ramble  far  from  the  encampment,  as  do  horses  and  mules;  nor  are 
they  necessarily  tied,  or  otherwise  confined,  but  are  permitted  to  range 
about  uncontrolled,  both  by  day  and  night;  and,  yet,  they  are  always  to 
be  found,  within  sight  or  hearing  of  the  encampment.  In  selecting 
hjrses,  mules  and  oxen,  for  this  expedition,  none  should  be  taken,  which 
rrc  under  five,  or  over  ten  years  of  age ;  nor  should  calves  or  colts,  un- 
der one  year  of  age,  be  taken  ;  (or,  from  the  tenderness  of  their  hoofs, 
and  their  inability  otherwise  to  endure  fatigue,  they  are  invariably  left  by 
the  w^ay.  The  hoofs  of  older  cattle,  even,  are  frequently  worn  to  such 
an  extent,  that,  at  times,  it  appears  almost  impossible,  for  them  to  conti- 
nue the  journey,  but  being  driven  on,  from  day  to  day,  their  hoofs  soon 
become  again  so  indurated,  as  to  obviate  all  further  inconvenience.  Some 
urge  the  propriety  of  working  cows,  instead  of  oxen,  both  the  advantage 
and  propriety  of  which,  are  very  questionable;  for,  it  will  be  admitted, 
that  they  are  much  inferior  to  oxen,  in  point  of  physical  strength,  and, 
hence,  cannot  be  as  serviceable  for  the  draught;  but  it  is  urged,  that,  al- 
though they  are  more  feeble,  and,  hence,  less  serviceable  for  the  yoke,  yet 
they  are  preferable,  because  they  answer  the  double  purpose  of  draught 
animals,  and  milk-cows;  but  the  force  of  this  reason  is  lost,  when  we 
take  into  consideration,  the  unwholesomeness  of  the  milk  of  animal?, 
whose  systems  are,  thus,  enfevered  by  exposi.re  to  excessive  heat,  and 
extreme  physical  exertion.  ^      » 

iSood  and  substantial  wage. is   ,uOuU'fJ>vays  be  selecledj  and  however 


146  THE  EMIGRANTS'  GUIDE 

firm  and  staunch  they  may  app>-  r,  thoy  should,  invariably,  be  particii' 
larly  examined,  and  repaiurd,  bt  jie  leaving  the  States;  for,  otherwise 
the  emigrant  may  set  out,  with  o  very  good  wagon  to  all  appearances, 
the  defects  of  which,  wheu  he  shall  L.  .'■  traveled  a  few  hundred  miles, 
u'ill  have  become  very  ob/ious  :  '.  le  coni>  i^^auji  of  which,  is,  that  he  is 
left  without  a  wagon,  anr'  thrown  upon  the  kindness  of  his  friends,  for 
the  conveyance  of  his  family  and  provisions.  TV  iieiher  WTigons  are  new 
or  old,  it  is,  perhaps,  preferable,  always,  to  have  the  tires  re-set,  previous 
to  leaving  Independence ;  otherwise,  before  traveling  one  thousand  miles, 
into  that  vastly  elevated  region,  from  the  intense  heat  of  those  extensive, 
sandy  plains,  and  the  extreme  aridity  of  the  atmosphere,  the  tires  become 
so  expanded,  and  the  w'ooden  portions'  of  the  wheels,  so  contracted,  that 
it  will  be  found  very  difficult  to  keep  them  together,  in  which,  hovvver, 
by  the  constant  and  regular  application  of  water,  you  may  pos  ''  =  suc- 
ceed. Those  who  go  to  Oregon,  if  they  design  to  perform  the  '(.iirney 
in  the  ordinary  time,  c(  120  days,  should  take  their  wago'^v4  with 
a  view  of  leaving  them  at  Fort  Hall,  and  performing  the  residi,',  of  the 
journey,  on  horseback  ;  otherwise,  the  repeated  interruptions,  b''  vw  that 
point,  will,  most  likely,  present  an  insuperable  barrier,  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  their  object.  Horses,  which  have  been  accustomed  to  wear- 
ing shoes,  should  also  be  shod  for  this  journey,  but  others  should  not,  as 
to  shoe  the  latter,  only  imposes  an  unncessary  expense,  and  spoils  the 
hoof,  by  cutting  away  that  horny  substance,  which,  hardened  by  the  in- 
tensely heated  sand,  would  answer  all  the  purposes  of  shoes.  Mules, 
like  horses,  if  they  have  not  been  previously  shod,  ought  not  to  be,  fiir 
the  same  reason,  as  that  above  stated ;  and  oxen  and  cows,  ought 
n-iver  to  be  shod  ;  yet  many  pursue  a  difTercnt  course,  and  thereby,  incur 
much  useless  expense,  and  inconvenience.  Those  horses  and  mules, 
which  it  becomes  necessary  to  shoe,  should  be  shod,  previous  to  leaving 
the  States;  and  one  or  two  pairs  of  extra  shoes,  should  be  taken  for  each, 
which  may  be  set  by  the  blacksmiths  on  the  way;  as  there  are,  always, 
several  mechanics  of  that  kind,  belonging  to  each  company.  Beside, 
tlie  foregoing  supplies,  emigraots  should,  also,  provide  themselves  ^\itn 
good  WTigon  covers  and  tents,  tent  poles,  axes,  spades,  and  hoes,  as  well 
as  strong  ropes,  of  about  sixty  feet  in  length,  for  each  horse  or  mule, 
•with  a  supply  of  stakes,  to  which  they  are  to  be  tied;  in  addition  d 
■which,  every  wagon  should  be  supplied  with  extra  axletrees,  chains, 
hammers,  and  the  like;  and  the  different  mechanics  should  also  take  a 
small  portion  of  their  tools,  as  they  are,  always,  needed  by  the  wp/y. — 
Should  there  be  physicians  and  surgeons,  attached  to  the  company,  as 
there  most  usually  are,  they  should  supply  themselves  with  a  small 
assortment  of  medicine,  and  a  few  surgical  instruments.  In  addition  to 
all  the  foregoing,  perhaps,  it  would  also  be  advisable  for  each  emigrant, 
to  provide  himself  with  some  such  goods,  as  are  adapted  to  the  Indian 
trade,  such,  for  instance,  as  beads,  tobacco,  handkerchiefs,  blankets, 
ready  made  clothing,  such  as  cheap,  summer  coats,  pantaloons,  vests  r«nd 
coarse,  cheap  shirts,  butcher  knives,  fishhooks,  and  powder  and  lead. 
Being  equipped  and  supplied,  is  here  suggested,  the  emigrant  may  set 
out  upon  this  wild,  yet  interesting  excursion,  with  high  prospects  of  en- 
joying many  extraordinary  and  pleasing  scenes;  and  of  safely  arriving 
at  liis  desired  place  of  destinai.i(  n,  without  sufl^ering  any  of  that  extraor- 
dinary toil,  unheard  of  hard.;;|ip,  or  eminent  danger,  which  his  owb 


TO  OREGON  AND  CALljFORNIA.  15(1 

ivhich  large  companies,  are  thrown  into  a  defensive  attitude,  in  case 

attack,  must  be  obvious  to  all,  even  the  inost  inexperienced,  in  this 

od  of  traveling:.     By  the  careful  observance,  of  the  foregoing  direc- 

and  suggestions,  as  well  as  a  close  adherence  to  their  own  experience, 

grants  will  avoid  all  those  hardships  and  dangers,  which  they  would, 

t'-wise,  nec*jssarily  experience.     It  is  true,  that  emigrants  in  traveling, 

iigh  these  wild  regions,  are  cut  off  in  a  measure,  from  society,  de- 

v^ed  of  many  of  the  luxuries  of  civilized  life;  and  it  is  also  true,  that 

f  eir  way  is  not  studded,  with  magnificent  churches,  and  spacious  houses 

of  public  entertainment ;  but  they  hare  enough  of  the  enjoyments  of 

society,  for  their  present  purposes,  and  as  many  of  the  luxuries  of  life,  as 

are  conducive  to  health  and  happiness :   and,  although  they  have  not 

the  benefits  of  churches,  yet  every  camp  of  the  emigrants  is  truly,  a 

camp-meeting,  and  presents  many  of  the  exciting  and  interesting  scenes, 

exhibited  upon  those  important  occasions  ;  and,  although  they  have  not 

all  the  conveniences,  of  commodious  public-houses,  yet  nature's  great 

inn.  is  always  jn  readiness  for  their  reception  ;  and  they  experience  the 

continual  manifestations  of  the  peculiar  care  and  protection,  of  its  great 

Proprietor,  w'hether  high,  upon  the  eternal  mountains  above,  or  deep,  in 

the  untrodden  vales  below. 

The  task  assigned  me  at  the  outset,  I  ha vo  now,  faith' ;illy,  though 
briefly,  and  imperfectly,  performed  ;  yet,  notv  ithstanding  it-  brevity  and 
imperfection,  it  is  hoped  that  it  will  afford  some  valuable  and  practical  in- 
formation,, in  reference  to  both  those  highly  inioortant  countries.  Noth- 
ing, however,  has  been  attempted,  but  an  extreaiely  brief,  thou;'^h  practical 
description  of  those  countries,  which  was  designed,  to  enable  the  reader, 
to  draw  tolerably  correct  conclusions,  in  reference  to  thei;  .  .tent,  moun- 
tains, rivers,  lakes,  islands,  harbors,  soil,  cimiate,  healtx  ,  productions, 
governments,  society,  trade  and  commerce;  and  to  give  the  emigrant, 
such  practical  information,  relative  to  the  routes,  the  equipment,  supplies, 
and  the  method  of  traveling,  as  is  thought  to  be  essential,  to  his  success 
and  safety :  all  of  which,  I  have  now  done,  is  far  as  con^isent  with  the 
extent  of  this  little  work,  and  my  original  design.  In  leaving  this  subject 
it  is  natural  for  us,  not  only  to  review  whai  we  have  ju!.^  seen,  in  refer- 
ence to  those  countries,  and  to  contemplate  tiieir  present,  prosperous  con- 
dition, but  also,  to  anticipate  their  conditivr;.  in  reference  to  the  progres- 
sive future.  In  view  of  their  increasing  population,  accumulating  wealth, 
and  growing  prosperity,  I  can  not  but  believe,  that  the  time  is  note  dis- 
tant, when  those  wild  forests,  trackless  plains,  untrodden  valleys,  and  the 
unbounded  ocean,  will  present  one  grand  scene,  of  continuous  improve- 
ments, universal  enterprise,  and  unparalleled  commerce:  when  those  vast 
forests,  shall  have  disappeared,  before  the  hardy  pioneer;  tliose  extensive 
plains,  shall  abound  with  innurnerable  herds,  of  domestic  animals;  those 
fertile  valleys,  shall  groan  under  the  immense  weight  of  their  abundant 
products  :  when  those  numerous  rivers,  shall  team  with  countless  steam- 
boats, steam-ships,  ships,  barques  and  brigs  ;  when  the  entire  country,  will 
be  everywhere  intersected,  with  turnpike  roads,  rail-roads  and  canals ; 
and  when,  all  the  vastly  numerous,  and  rich  resources,  of  that  now,  al- 
most unknown  region,  will  be  fully  and  advantageously  developed.  To 
complete  this  picture,  we  may  fancy  to  ourselves,  a  Boston,  a  New  York, 
a  Philadelphia  and  a  Baltimore,  groM-ing  i^p  in  a  day,  as  it  were,  both  in 
Oregon  and  California ;  crowded  with  a  yafet  popMation,  and  affording 


^ 


THE  /EMIGRANTS'    GUIDE 

all  the  enjoyments  and  luxuries,  of  civilized  life.     And  to  this  wc 
ad(L  numerous  churches,  magnificent  edifices,  spacious  colleges,  am. 
pendous  monuments  and  observatories,  all  of  Grecian  architecture,  j^i, 
ing  tiieir  majestic  heads,  high  in  the  aerial  region,  amid  those  towf 
pyramids  of  perpetual  snow,  looking  down  upon  all  the  busy,  biii 
setries,  of  tumultuous  civilization,  amid  the  eternal  verdure  of  peren 
spiing.     And  in  fine,  we  are  also  led  to  contemplate  the  time,  as  fast  i 
proaching,  when  the  supreme  darkness  of  ignorance,  superstition,  ai; 
despotism,  which  now,  so  entirely  pervade     many  portions  of  those  n, 
mote  regions,  will  have  fled  forever,  before  the  march  of  civilization,  and 
the  blazing  light,  of  civil  and  religious  liberty  J  when  genuine  republican- 
ism, and  unsophisticated  democracy/,  shall  be  reared  up,  and  tower  aloft, 
even  upon  the  now  wild  shores,  of  the  great  Pacific  ;  where  they  shall 
forevei   stand  forth,  as  enduring  monuments,  to  the  increasing  wisdom 
of  wa?i,  and  the  infinite  kindness  and  protection,  of  an  all-wise,  and  over- 
ruling Providence, 

ERRATA. 

Page  4,  line  14,  for  recource,  recourse.  8,5,  arranged,  arraigned,  8,  4S,  their,  his.  23,  14,  Caw- 
lity,  "'Cawlitz.  28,  23,  Hootanie,  Kootanie.  30,  14,  Cawlily,  Cawlitz.  38,  39,  happens,  happen. 
37,  16,  produce,  produces.  33,  52,  notice,  a  notice.  40,  2,  a  number,  numbers.  45,  4G,  gids,  sides. 
45,  47,  side,  sides.  48,  42,  Whenever,  Wherever.  49,  14,  is.  are.  52,  33,  make,  makes.  63,  8,  .con- 
sists, Crtinsisi.  55,  23,  seUlements,  seilleroent.  55,  47,  have,  has.  58, 16,  is,  are.  59, 35,  t'iionukes, 
Chanukes.  GO,  4,  Chenook:  ,  Chenuke  .  61,1,  !i,if.  61,38,  extend,  extends,  64,  11, places,  place.  69, 
42,  of  my,  my.  71,19,  in,  on.  72,  19,  eives,  give.  73,  42,  pnur  their,  pours  its.  76,  35.  are,  is.  77.31, 
is,  are.  79,  23,  renders,  render.  79,  49,  is,  are.  80,  37,  Badago,  Bcdaga.-  80,  38,  Bodato,  Bodaga, 
86, 15,  consist,  consists.  86,  30,  artimesia,  artemista.  S8,  45,  undigenous,  indigenous.  01.36,  pro- 
fusions,  profusion.  92,  23,  succeed,  succeeds.  94,  2,  exorcise,  exercise.  102,  40,  building,  build- 
ings. 104,  24,  and  several,  with  several.  109,  11,  north,  south.  Ill,  47,  cause,  causes.  113,16. 
labors,  labor,  jfl  13,  32,  city,  the  city.  121,  33,  droaaishly,  dronishly.  121,  38.  this,  the,  V2'2,  7, 
were,  was.    Ip,  li,  irnlgration,  emigration. 


■''     -,  .^ 


/ 


[ 


\ 


