Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




THE UNIVERSITY OF GUIFORIIIIi 




Q := 




THE UNIVERSITY OF CAllFORNIi 



a: 



\\A 



ja( 



^^ 



c=nr, 



B. 



V\»i\ 



3*gl 



LIBRARY OF THE 



cfv, 



3 i r^l 



- v^ 



.\»>< 



~-S-;V: 



,P> 



UMM 



•lae&i 



QJ 

LIBRARY OF THE U 

(7 




\^^=a^^ 




Y OF CUIFORim 



LIBRARY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF GALIFORM 




Y OF CALIFORNIA 



LIBRARY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORII 




M^k\^kM 







>''^^'*- .^^1^' 



'0' 



'{^"'6 



ROCKY MOUNTAIN LIFE; 



OB, 



^^a^v^^taist ^mm^ 



A2n> 



PERILOUS ADVENTURES 



IN IBB 



FAR WEST, 



DURING AN EXPEDITION OP THREE YEARS. 



BY RUFTJS B. SAGE. 






V J * • • 



^ J ^ ^ ^ ^ 

. 1 ^' ' • 






».■• 



BOSTON: 
-WENTWORTH & COMPANY, 

86 WASHINGTON 8TBEET. 
1857. 



ROCKY MOUNTAIN LIFE; 



OB, 



^i?a^if^9[a(£t mm^^ 



A2n> 



PERILOUS ADVENTURES 



IN IBB 



FAR WEST, 



DURING AN EXPEDITION OP THREE YEARS. 



BY RUFUS B. SAGE. 






1 » • 



• o 



' . ^ . . J . -> > 



BOSTON: 
WENTWORTH & COMPANY. 

86 WASHINGTON 8TBEET. 
1857. 



P 5 q::: 



Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1857, by 

WENTWORTH & COMPANY, 
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts. 



• • •• ••*•»• 

• • • •• ••• .••••• • • • * *• 






r 



PREFAC E. 



The following work was written immediately after 

the author liad returned from the perilous and event- 

M expedition which is here narrated. The intense 

interest which every citizen of the Union feels in 

relation to that vast region of our country lying 

between the Mississippi and the Pacific Ocean, will, 

it is believed, render the publication of a volume 

like this of more than usual importance at the present 

time. The lofty clifis of the Bocky Mountains are 

soon to echo to the tread of advancing civilization, as 

symbolized in the Pacific railway, which will, in a few 

years, speed the iron horse and his living freight 

&om Boston to San Francisco, forming a bond of 

social and commercial intercoiuse across the con- 

* • 

tinent. 



Ml9495i) 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 



Objects of a proposed excursion. Primary plans and movements. A Digresikm. 
Rendezvous for Oregon emigrants and Santa Fe tnuidrs. Sensations on a 
first visit to the border Prairies. Frontier Indiana. 29 

CHAPTER II. 

Preparations for leaving. Scenes at Camp. Things as they appeared. Sira;^- 
city of mountaineers. Sleep in the upt^n air. Character, habiti*, and rostume 
of mountaineers. Heterogeneous ingredients of Company. The cuuimaud- 
•nt. En route. Comical exhibition and adventure with a S^iaiii>«h coinpa- 
ny. Grouse. Elm Grove. A storm. Santa Fe trailers. Indian Ixxitle. 34 

CHAPTER III. 

The Pottowatomies. Crossing the Wakaroosha. Advenuird at the Springs. 
The Caw chief. Kansas river and Indians. Pleading for widskey. Hick- 
ory timber. Prairie tea. Scenes at the N. Fork of Blue. WiUl honey. 
Betum party. Mountaineer in Caliturnia. Adventure wiih abuifalo. In- 
dian atrocities. Liquor and the Fur Trade. Mrict guard. Hi;<h prices. 45 

CHAPTER IV. 

Coontry from the frontiers to Big Blue ; its geological character, &c. Novel cure 
for fever and ague. Indian trails. Game. Large rabbits. Antelope, and 
their peculiarities. Beaver cuttings. Big Blue and its vicinity. Dangerous 
eountry. Pa\vnee bmvery. Night^alarm, (Prairies on fire.) Platte river. 
Predominant characteristics of the Grand Prairies, and theory explanative of 
of their phenomenon. Something to laugh at. " Big Jim " and the ante- 
lope. 54 

CHAPTER V. 

DltMirted camp. Big Jim*s third attempt as a hunter. Buff do and other particti- 

lan* Big Jim lying guard. Butchering. Stranije Kclertiunn. ICxtraurdi- 

nary eating, and excellence cf bulTalo meat. BraJy's L>laud. The mur* 

deier's &to. Substitute fur wood. A storm, (ilnme in camp. Strange 

• infiatnation. Tenacity of buffalo to life, and how to hunt them. Cross S. 

Foik of Platte. Big Jim's fourth adventure. ^ ^^ 

(7) 



I 
I 
I 



▼iii CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER VI. 

Aih creek. Pawnee and Sioux battle-groond. Bread-root The Eagle*i Neet 
Mad nvolf. Number and variety of prairie wf^ves, — their sagacity. Mad 
bull. Making and curing meat Big Jim still unfortunate. Johnsim's creek. 
McFarlan's Castle. Deceptiveness of distances. Express from the ForL 
Brave Bear. Bull T^. Talk with the Indians. Speech of Marto-cog- 
enihne. Reply. Tahtungah-sana's address. 75 

CHAPTER VIL 

The Chimney. Abet Spur of the Rocky Mountains. Scott's Bluff Roman- 
tic scenery. Mimic city.- A pyramid. A monument An elevated garden. 
Mountain sheep. An Eden. Death in camp. The wanderer's grave. 
Horse creek and gold. Goche's hole. Arrival at Fort Platte. Remarki 
by the way. Prairie travel. liocality and description of the Fort Indian 
lodges. Migratory habits of mountain and prairie tribes. Scenes at Fort 
Drunken Indians. Tragical event Indian funeral. Speech of Etespa* 
huska on the death of his lather. 90 

CHAPTER Vni. 

Coast clear, and Trade opened. More visitors. Smoking out the natives. Inci« 
dent illustrative of Indian character. Expeditions for trade. Black Hills. 
Rawhide. An Indian and a buffalo chase. Deep snow, extreme cold, and 
painful journey. L'eau-qui-court Remarks. Lost White river; its val- 
ley, fruits, and game. Building site. The Devil's Tea-pot Troubles with 
Indians. Theft and its punishment Indian soldiers. Christmas extras. 
Outrageous conduct Rascality of traders. " That Old Serpent" Indian 
lupentition, religious tenets and practices. Notions upon general morality. 103 

CHAPTER IX. 

Dangers connected with the liquor trade. Difficulty with Bull Eagle. Scenes 
of bloodshed and horror. Cheating in the fur trade. How the red man 
becomes tutored in vice. A chief's daughter oflfered in exchange for liquor. 
Indian mode of courtship and marriage. Squaws an article of traffic Di<- 
Torce. Plurality of wives. 116 

CHAPTER X. 

Tahtunga-egoniska. High gaming. Weur-sena WarkpoUo, a strange story. 
The Death Song, a tale of love. Medicine-men. Extraordinary perform- 
ance of Tahtunga-mobellu. Wonderful feats of jugglery. 125 

CHAPTER XL 

Food for horses. Squaws and their performances. . Dogs and dog-meat Be- 
turn to Fort Starvation. Travel by guess. Death from drinking. Medi- 
cine-making. A BuriaL liftle Lodge and the French trader. A speech 



CONTENTS. 



m coandL Jomiiejr to White river. High winde and mow. IntMiie wot- 
feriDfB aiMi painful raeulti. IS6 

CHAPTER XII. 

Another drunken spree. Hcnsee devoured by wolves. An upset A blowing up. 
Daring feat of wolves. A girl ofiertd for liquor. Winter on the Platt«>. 
Boat building. Hunting expedition. Journey up the Platte, bland campw 
Narrow escape. Snow storm. Warm Spring. Pass of the Pkitte into' the 
prairies. A valley. Bitter Cottonwood. Indian forts. Wild fruit. Root- 
digging. Cherry tea and its uses. Geology of the country. Soils, grasses, 
herbs, plants, and purity of atmospheie. Uone-hhoe crveL. A panther. 
Plairie dugs and their peculiarities. 143 

CHAPTER XIII. 

The Creek valley. The Platte as a mountain stream. Canon. Romantic pros* 
pect. Comical bear story. Perilous encounter with a wounded bulL Ge- 
ological remarks. Division of party. Sa&ty of spring tmvel. La B(M)te*8 

creek. Remarks by the way. Service-berry. Deer Creek. GenenJ 
observations. Moccasin making. Box elder. Bear killed. Excellence of 
its flesh. Diflerent kinds of bears in Oregon and tlie moimtains. The 
grizzly bear, his nature and habits. 160 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Desperate encounter with a grizzly bear, and extraordinary instance of taSdxiog. 
Gose contest. A comical incident. Cross Platte. Canon can^ Sage 
trees. Mountain sheep, and all about them. Independence Rock ; why so 
called, and description of it Devil's Gate. Landscape scenery. 159 

CHAPTER XV. 

Return route. Oregon trail from Independence Rock through the South Pass. 
Cross the Sweet Water and Platte. Mountain FowL Journey up Medicine 
Bow. Dangerous country. A fight with the Sioux. The " Carcagne." 
A surprise. Visit to the Crow village. Niunber and character of the Crow 
nation. Selling a prisoner for tobacco. Description of TAwttui^^ Plains. 106 



CHAPTER XVI. 

SibilleVhole. Novel bitters. Chugwater. Gold. Curiosity. Afi&irsat ths 
Fort. Amusements. Gambling among squaws, and games played. Squaw 
dresses, and riding fashicm. Items of interest to the curious, |Mroving the in* 
leioourse of the ancient Romans with the people of this continent 178 

CHAPTER XVn. 

Singular exhibition of natural aflbction. Embarii for the States. Scard^ U 
provisions and consequent hardship and suffering. ExtraoidiiMuy dadng of 



CONTENTS. 



wolves. Difficulties of navigation. Norel diet. Fishing. A fish story, 
and another to match it. A bull story. Hard aground and dismal situation. 
Extreme exposure. Culd, hungry, and wet. Again afloat Re-supply of 
provisions. Camp on fire. A picuire of Platte navigation. Country nortli 
of river. Adventnn.>. wlrh a bull. Indian benevolence. Summary of hard- 
sliips and deprivations. Abandon voyage. t?-5 

CHAPTER XVm. 

Hunting excursion. Thirst more painful than hunger. Geolc^cal observatitms. 
Mournful casualty. Sad scene of sepulture. Melancholy night. Voyage 
in an empty boat. Ruins of a Pawnee village at Cedar Dluif Plover 
creek. Cache Grove. Thousand Islands. Abandon boat. Exploring com- 
pany. A horrible feituation. Agony to lf)rment. Pawnee village. Exera- 
I^ary benevolence of an Indian chief. Miserable fourth of July. Four days* 
■tarvation. Arrival at Cou.icil ClufF. Proceed to Independeurc. 133 

CHAPTER XIX. 

^ The country net ween the Pawnee village and Bellevieu, and from that to Fort 
Leavenworth. Leave fri.lojXindence for the Mouniaius. Meet Pawnees. 
Indian hospitality. Journey up the Soutli Fork Platte. Fort Grove. Ijea- 
ver creek. Bijou. Cliabwnard's camp. Country described. Medicine 
Lodge. The Chyennes ; ilieir character and histor}'. Arrive at Fort Lan« 
caster. Different localitleR in its neighborhood. Fatal Duel. Ruins. 230 

CHAPTER XX. 

Old aoqi]aintanc«s. India:i murders. Mode of travelling in a dangerous coun- 
tiy Mexican traders. Sununary way of teaching manners. Fort lAucas* 
ter and surrounding country. Resume journey. Cherry creek and connect- 
ix^ observations. Sketch of the Arapahos, their country, character, &c. 
Camp of free traders. Blackfoot camp. Daugberty's creek. Observations 
relative to the Divide. Mexican cupidity. Stnu^ visitors. The lone trav* 
ellers. Arrive at the Arkansas. General remarks. Curious specimens of 
cacti. Fontaine qui Bouit, or Natural Soda fountain. Indian superstition. 
Ekichanting scenery. Extraordinary wall of sandstone. 210 

CHAPTER XXL 

Vidnify of the Arkansas. Settlement The Pueblo. Rio San Carlos, its val- 
layB and scenery. Shooting by moonlight. Taos. Review of the country 
twveUed over. Teuxs ; its vicinity, scenery, and mines. Ranches and Ran- 
dieroa. Mexican houses ; their domestic economy, and filth. Abject poverty 
and deplorable condition of the lower classes of Mexicans, with a genend 
leview of their character, and some of the causes contributing to their pre- 
«Dt degradation. Tlie Pueblo Indians and their stmnge notions. Ancient 
laniple. Character of the Pueblos. Journey to the Uintah river, and obeer- 
miiOEis by the way. Taos Utahs, ParUtalis, Uintah and Lake Utahs. The 



CONTENTS. « 

■■■ruxn.nr ii I - - '~ ■■ ■ ■■■■■ 

Diggen ; misery of tlieir ricaaUon, itmige mode of lying, with a tketch of 
thair character. The Nav^ ; their civilization, hostility to SpaaMnb, 
hidicroiis barbaricyy bravery, &c., with a sketch of tlieir cowitry, —mk wiiy 
they are leas favorable to the whites than formerly. 221 

CHAPTER XXII. 

Uiatah trade. Snake Indiami; their coantry -^nJ chancter. Description of 
Upper California. The Eastern Section. < . r^ ;it Salt Lake and circumjacent 
oomitry. Desert. Digger country, and ..: '-im ronrti. Fertiliiy of so3. 
PrevaUing rock and minerals. Abundanc t wiiii fruit, grain * and game. 
Valley of the Colorado. Magnificent scei -y. VulleyM of the Uintah and 
other rivers. Vicinity of the Gila. Fac*. •« ilie coumry, M>d »Soc. Sweet 
spots. Mildness of climate, and its Ileal I). < • -. 'i Iw nauvc«. fc>i<u>iiyof 
inhabitants. >o government. All abui.> w. Culurado and Gila rivers. 
Abundance of fish. Trade in pearl oystr . .le-ll^s. Practicable routes from 
the United States. 232 

CHAPTER X vill. 

Blinerals. Western California. The Sacra • ■/) and contiguous regioni. 
Principal rivers. Fish. Commercial ad \. .;"•;*. Riy of 8an Francisco. 
Other Bays and Harbors. Description ol - ' '>iiniry ; territory northwest 
of the Sacramento ; Tlamath Monntams ; < u. *riii:i ninge and its vicinity ; 
southern parts ; tijnber, river-bottoms ; V . . •• • >( Sacramento, del Plumas, 
and Tulare; tlu;ir extent, fertility, limber. . . fruit ; wild gminand clover, 
qxjntaneous; wonderful fecundity of t>oil, . • .ts proJucts ; the productions, 
climate, rains, and dews ; geological and . .(.tralogical character ; fi^a of 
the country; its water; ite healtiiiness ; |> < -'•. ; > u^iembundance of cattle, 
honttM, and slieep, their prices, du^ ; jDeahi t ;>rey ; tlie inhabitants, who; 
hidians, their diaracter and condition ; Ca;. ^ai of tlie Province, with othinr 
towm; advantages of San Fnuicisco; iitUud setdemeuts; foreignefs and 
' Mexicans ; Govenmient; its lull military tsi '.til, 111. Ilemarks. 299 

CHAPTER XAIV. 

Visitors at Uintah. Adventures of a trapping parly. The Mnndiies, or white 
Indians ; some account of them. AmoBements at rendezvous. Mysterious 
city, and attempts at its exploration, — speculation relative to its iuhabitanti. 
Leave for Fort Hall. Camp at Bear river. Boundary between the U. 
Stales and Mexico. Gruen valleys, &c. Cuiir.try en route. BrownVhole. 
Geological olMervatiouK. Soda, heer, and Steamboat springs ; their peculi- 
arities. Minerals. Valley of Bear river ; its lertility, timber, and aban- 
donee oi wild fruit. Buixulo berries, buperior advantages of this sectioiL 
^Giieral lar. 2B0 

CHAPTER XXV. 

Fort Hall; 'its history, and locality. Information relattve to Oregon. Boimd* 



aoi CONTENTS. 



aries and extent of the territory. Iti riTera and lakes, with a concise descrip- 
tion of them severally. Abundance and variety of fish and water-fowl. 
Harbors and islands. Oregon as a whole ; its moontains and geograi^cal 
divisions. Eastern Divison ; its wild scenery, valleys, soil, and timber ; 
volcanic mvages ; comitry between Clarke's river and the Columbia. North 
of the Colwnbia ; its general character. Middle Division ; its valleys, prai- 
ries, highlands, and forests. Western Division ; a beaudful country ; ex- 
tensive valleys of extraordinary fertility ; productive plains ; abundance of 
timber, its astonishing size and variety. A brief summary of iacts. 2^3 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

Qimate of Oregon ; its variableness ; its rains ; a southern climate in a north* 
em latitude. Productiveness ; grain, fruits, and flowers, wild and culti* 
vated. Geological characteristics. Soils and prevailing rock. Minerals, 
4dc. Variety of game. Wolves. Horses, and other domestic animals. 
Population, white and native ; Indian tribes, their character and condition. 
Missionary stations, and their improvements. Present trade of Oregon. 
Posts of the Hudson Bay CcMupany. Settlements. Oregon City, its situa- 
tion and advantages ; about Linnton ; about Wallammetle valley, Fualitine 
plains and Umpqua river ; Yanoouvre, and its superior advantages. Kind- 
ness of Hudson Bay Company to settlers. 2G9 

CHAPTER XVn. 

Tile manufacturing fecilities of Oregon. Commercial and agricultural advan- 
tages reviewed. Rail Road to the Pacific. Route, mode of travelling, and 
requisite equipment for emigrants. Importance of Oregon to the United 
Stales. Incident in the early history of Fort Hall. Why the Blackfeet are 
hostile, and bright spots in their charaeter. Mild weather. Leave for tho 
Platte. Journey to the Yampah, and sketch of the intermediate ooimtry. 
New Park. Head of Grand river. The landscape. Difierent routes to 
Fort Lancaster. Old Park. 277 

CHAPTER XXVm. 

Ttom Grand river to Bayou Salfide. Observations by the way. Description of 
the Bayou. Yoracity of magpies. Journey to Cherry creek.' Country en 
iMite. Crystal creek. Abundance of game. Antelope hunting. Remark- 
able sagacity of wolves. Snow storms and amusement Ravenn. Move 
camp. Comfortable winter quarters. Animal food conducive to general 
health and longevity. A laughable instance of sound deeping. Astonish- 
ing wolfuie rapacity. Beaver lodges and all about beaver. Hunting excur- 
ricn. Vasques' creek, its valleys, table lands, mountains, and prairiea. 
Gamp. Left alone. Sensations, and care to avoid danger. A nocturnal 
▼Utor. Thrilling adventure and narrow escape. A lofty specimen of 
"fttUn down stain.'* Geological statistica. 287 



CONTENTa tM 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

Return to the Fort Texan recruiting officer. New plane. Yolimteer. TW 
Chance Shot, or Special Providence. Texan camp. Country contigiioai 
to the Arkansas, from Fontaine qui Bouit to the Rio de laa Animaa, 
Things at rendezvous. A glance at the company. Disposal of force. Marek 
up the de las Animas. The country ; Timpa valley, and its adjoining hiUi, 
to the de las Animas. The latter stream ; its canon, valley and enchantiqg 
scenery. Tedious egress. Unparalleled sufiering frnn hunger, toil, and 
cold. Wolf flesh and buffido hide. Painful consequences of eating cactL 
A feast of mule meat afker seven days' starvation. Camp at the Taos tiiuL 
The a4jaeent country. Strict guard. A chase. The meet reward hr 

treason. * 900 

« 

CHAPTER XXX. 

March down the Cimarone. Junction of the two divisions. Country between 
the de las Animas and the Cimarone. Perilous descent Canon of tha 
Cimarone. Soil and prevailing rock. A fort Grandeur and sublimity of 
scenery. Beauty of rocks. Cimarone of the pain. Fruits and game. Wide- 
spread desolation. A dreary country. Summer on the Desert Remarks. 
Encounter with Indians. Nature's nobleman. Wild horses and diflerant 
modes of catching them. Failure of expected leinforcements. March into 
the enemy's country. Ancient engmvings upon a rock. Boy in the wolf's 
den. A man lost Forced march. Torment of thirst Remarks. Tlia 
lost found. Expulsion for cowardice, — its eflect 309 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

Mexican camp. Pursuit Advance upon Mora. Enemy discovered. Coun- 
try between the Rio de las Animas and Mora ; its picturesque beauty. Ad* 
mirable point of observation. Fortified position. Battle of the pass ; order 
of attack, passage of the river, storming the enemy's camp, and number of 
killed, wounded and prisoners. Council of war. Prisoners released. 
Message to Amijo. Return inarch. Mexican army. Attacked, and results 
of action. Mexican bravery. Retreat. CroM the Table Mountain. New 
species of wild onions. March down the de las Animas. Discouragements 
accamulate. Disband. Sketch cf £Eu;tions. Texan priscmers. Arrival of 
reinforcements. Battle of the Arroyo: killed, wounded, and prisoners. 
Retreat of Amijo. " Stampede." Frightful encounter with the Cunuuichei 
and Kuyawas. Discharge of troops. Afiair with Capt Cook. Surrender 
to tJ. S. Dragoons, and &ilure of exped^on. Return to Texas. Journey 
to the Platte. Country between the Arkfuisas and Beaver creek. Feasting 
at camp. Crows' eggs. Lateness of season. Snow-storm in June. An 
Indian fort. Serio-comico adventure with a woUl Indians. Song of tha 
nightpbird. 318 

2 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

Night on the Prairie. Head of the Kansas river. Minerals. Country. 
OtAd. Wonderful incident relative to a wounded bull. Indians. Join the 
Anpahoe. Moving village. Country between Beaver creek and the Platte. 
Canon. Reach Fort Lancaster. Fortune bettered. News from the States. 
Murder. Extraordinary instances of human tenacity to life. Arrival of 
Indians. Theft Chyenne outrage. Return of Oregon emigrants. "CHd 
Bob," and tiis adventures. A " Protracted Meeting/' or Indian Medicine- 
making. Indian oath. Jaunt to the mountains. Mountain scenery. Camp 
en Thompson's creek. Wild fruits. Concentration of valleys. Romantic 
riew. A gem in the mountains. Grand river pass. Salt lakes. Aston- 
ishing scope of vision. The black-tailed deer. Peculiarity in horses. Re- 
markable natural forfification. Return. Travelling by guess. ' 331 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

Newspapers. False reports. Singular grasses. Sale of skins at Fort Lancaster. 
An excursion. An incident. Camp. Huge horns. Leopard. Panther. 
Slaughter of eagles. Drensiug skins. The hunter's camp. Vasques' creek. 
Tlia weather. Return of comrades to Fort. Sweets of solitude. Expo- 
sure in a snow-storm. The canon of S. Fork Platte. A ridge. A val- 
fey. Beautiful locality. Choice site for a settlement Flowers in February. 
A huntijig incident. Fate of the premature flowers. Adventure with a 
iheep. Discovered by Indians. A pleasant meeting. Camp at Crystal 
creek. Thoughts of home. Resolve on going. Commence journey. The 
caravan. " Big Timber." Country to the " Crossing." Big Salt Bottom. 
Flowers. A stranger of other lands. Difficulty with Indians. " Friday." 
Tedious travellinn^. No timber. Detention. Country. Pawnee Fork. 
Mountain and Spanish companies. Spy Buck, the Shawnee war-chief. 
Pawnee Fork. — Cure for a rattlesnake*8 bite. Further detention. Sketch 
of adjacent country. Pawnee Rocks. En route with Friday. Musquetoea. 
Observations. Friday as a hunter. 346 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

Thf. Arapaho American, a sketch of real life. Tenets of the mountain Indmoi 
in reference to a future state of rewards and punishments. The " water 
bulL" Country between Cow creek and Council Grove. Inviting locatity 
for settlement. Sudden rise of water. Separate routes. Dangerous travel, 
ling. Osage village. Osages, and all about them. Arrival at Van Biunoiiy 
▲rkiaaas. Concluding lemarka. 357 



ROCKY MOUNTAIN LIFE. 



CHAPTER I 



Objects of a proponed excursion. — Primary plans and rouvements. — A digiwuon — 
Rendezvous for Oregon emigiants and Santa Fe traden. — SemiuioQs on a fimi 
visit to the border Prairies. — ^Frontier Indians. 

My parpose in visiting the Rocky Mountains, and amntries adjacent, 
having hitlierto proved a iruitful source of inquiry to the man^ persons 1 meet, 
when aware of my having devoted thwe years to travel in those remote 
regions, and I am so plied with almost numberless otlior questions, I know 
of no better way to dispose of them satisfiictorily, than by doing what I 
had thought of at the outset, to wit : writing a book. 

But, says one, more books have been alreuiy written upon subjects of a 
kindred nature, tlian will ever find readers. True, indeed ; yet I mutt 
venture one more ; and this much I promise at the start : it shall be diflerent, 
in most respects, from all that have preceded it ; and if I fail to produce an 
agreeable variety of adventures, interwoven with a large fund of valuable 
information, tiien I shall not have accomplished my purpose. 

Yet, 'why did I go? — ^what was my object?' Let me explain: Dame 
Nature bestowed upon me lavishly that innate curiosity, and fondness for 
things strange and new, of which every one is more or less possessed. 
Phrencdogists would declare my organ of Inquisitiveness to be largely 
developed ; and, certain it is, 1 have a great liking to tread upon unfre* 
quentM ground, and mingle among scenes at once novel and romantic. 
Love of ^venture, then, was the great prompter, while an enfeebled state 
of health sensibly admonished me to seek in other parts that invigorating 
air and t^limate denied by the diseased atmosphere of a populous country. 
I also wished to acquaint myself with tlie geogra|^y of those comparatively 
nnezplcHed regions^— their geological character, curiosities, resources, and 
natural advantages, together with tlieir real condition, present inhabitants, 
indncements V> emigrants, and most favorable localities for settlemeots, to 
enable me to speak trom personal knowledge upon sabiects so interesting 
to the pnUir nind, at the present time, as are the above. Here, tfaea, were 

3* (29* 






*Stf ' ' * RENDEZVOUS OF OREGON EMIGRANTS. 

* * (xijMts'eifery way' worthy of attention, and vested with an importance that 
would render my excureion not a mere idle jaunt for the gratification of 
Belfiah curioeity. This much by way of prelude, — ^now to tte task in hand. 

While yet undecided as to the most advisable mode of prosecuting my 
intended enterprise, on learning that a party of adventurers were rendez- 
voused at Westport, Mo., preparatory to their long and arduous journey to 
y the new-formed settlements of the Columbia river, I hastened to that place, 
where I arrived in the month of May, 1841, with the design of becoming 
one of their number. In this, however, I was doomed to disappointment 
by being too late. A tew weeks subsequent marked the return of several 
fur companies, from their annual excursions to the Indian tribes inhabiting 
the regions adjacent to the head-waters of the Platte and Arkansas rivers, 
whose outward trips are performed in the fall months. Impatient at delay 
and despairing of a more eligible opportunity, for at least some time to come, 
I made prompt arrangements with one of them, to accompany it, en rouief 
as fiir as the Rocky Mountains, intending to proceed thereafter as circum- 
stances or inclination might suggest 'Hiis plan of travelling was adhered 
to, notwithstanding the detention of some three months, which retarded its 
^^ prosecution. 

I would here beg indulgence of the reader to a seeming digression* The 
peculiar locality ofthe places to whose vicinity he is now introduced, owing 
to the deep interest cherished in the public miml relative to the Oregon coun- 
try, will doubtless call for more than a mere passing notice : I allude to the 
towns of Independence and Westport. Situated as they are, at the utmost 
verge of civilization, and upon the direct route to Oregon and regions adja^ 
cent, they must retain and command, as the great starting points for emigranta 
and traders, that importance alread^ assumed by general consent. Th^ 
fiicilities of access from all parts of the Union, both by land imd water, are 
nowhere exceeded. The proud Missouri rolls its turbid waves within six 
milcL/of either place, opening the highway of steam communication, while 
numlferless prime roads that converge from every direction, point to them as 
thei4 ^mmon focus. Thus, the staid New Enfflander may exchange his nar 
tive hflls for the frontier prairies in the short interval of two weeks ; and in 
h^i that time the citizen of the sunny South may reach the appointed ren- 
dezvous ; and, nearer by, the hardy emigrant may commence his long over- 
land journey, from his own door, fully supplied with all the necessaries for 
its successful termination. 

Independence is the seat of justice for Jackson county. Mo., about four 
hundred miles west by north of St Louis, and contains a population of 
nearly two thousand. Westport is a small town in the same county, near 
the 'mouth of the Kansas river, — three miles from the Indian territory, and 
thirty below the U. S. Dragoon station at Fort Leavenworth. The regular 
routes to Santa Fe and Oregon date their commencement at these places. 
The country in this vicinity is beginning to be generally settled by thrifty 
fiirmers, from whom all the articles necessary for travellers and traders, may 
be procured upon reasonable terms. 

Starting from either of the above points, a short ride bears the adventnier 
across the state line, and afibrds bun the opportunity of taking his ini- 
tiatory lessons amid the realities of prairie life. Here, most of the trading 
and emigrant companies remain encamped for several weeks, to xecnut 






^ « « « 



• « • • 






• tf » 



« « » w 




KlHS OF TUB SBAWKUB. — />ri 33. 



fiORDER-PHAIRIES AND INDIANa 33 

Qieir animalfl and complete the needful amngements, prior to undertaking 
the toilsome and dangerous journey before them. 

The scenery of this neighborhood is truly delightful It teems indeed 
like one Nature's favored spots, where Flora presides in all her regal 
splendor, and with tlie fragrance of wild flowers, perfumes the breath of 
spring and lades the summer breeze with willing incense ; — now, sport- 
ing beside her fountains and revelling in her dales,— then, smiling Irom 
her hill-tope, or luzurating beneath her groves. 

I shall never forget the pleasing sensations produced by my first ?isit to 
the border-prairies. It was in the month of June, soon alter my arrival at ^ 
Westport. The day was clear and beautifuL A gentle shower the pre- 
ceding night had purified the atmosphere, and the laughing flowerets, newly 
invigorate from the nectarine draught, seemed to vie with each other in 
the exhalation of their sweetest odors. The blushing strawberry, scarce 
yet divested of its rich burden of fruit, kissed my evfery step. The butter- 
cup, tulip, pink, violet, and daisy, witli a variety of other beautie:*, unknown 
to the choicest collections of civilized life, on every side captivated the eye 
and delighted the fancy. 

The ground was clothed with luxuriant herbage. The grass, where 
left UBcropped by grazing herds of cattle and horses, had attained a sur- 
prising growth. The landscape brought within the scope of vision a most 
magnificent prospect. The groves, clad in their gayest loliage and nodding 
to me wind, ever and anon, crowned the gentle acclivities or reared their 
heads from the valleys, as if planted hj Qie hand of art to point the way- 
fiurer to Elysian retreats. The gushmg fountains, softly breathing their 
untaught melody, before and on either hand, at short intervals, greeted the 
ear and tempted the taste. The lark, tinnet, and martin, uniting with other 
fisathered songsters, poured forth heir sweetest strains in one grand con- 
cert, and made the air vocal with their warblings ; and the brown-plumed 
grouse, witless of the approach of man, till dangerously near, would here 
and there emerge wellnigh from under foot, and whiz through the air 
with almost lightning speed, leaving me half frightened at her unlooked 
for presence and sudden exit Hither and yon, truant bands of horses and 
came, lirom the less inviting pastures of the settlements, were seen in the 
distance, cropping the choice herbage before them, or gambolling in all the 
pride of native ireedom. 

Amid such scenes I delight to wander, and often, at this late day, will 
my thoughts return, unbidden, to converse with them anew. There is a 
charm in the loneliness — an enchantment in the solitude — a witching 
variety in the sameness, that must ever impress the traveller, when, for 
the first time, he enters within the confines of the great western prairies. 

One thing furtlier and I will have done with this digression. Connected 
wilii the foregoing, it may not be deemed amiss to say something in relation 
to the Indian tribes inhabiting the territory adjacent to this common camp- 
ing-place. The nearest native settlement is some twelve miles distant, and 
belongB to the Shawnees. This nation numbers in all fourteen or fifteen 
Jhwidied men, women and children. Their immediate neighbors are the 
IMawaies and Wyandotts^— the former claiming a population of eleven 
^sndied, and the latter, three or four hundred. Many connected with 
tribes outstrip the nearer whites, in point of civiUzation and refine- 



d4 PREPARATIONS FOR LEAVING. 

menV-^xcelling them both in honesty and morality, and all that eleyatai 
and ennobles the human character. Their wild habits have become in a 
mat measure subdued by the restraining^ influences of Christianity, and 
uiey themselves transformed into industrious cultivators of the soil,—- occu- 
pying neat mansions with smihng fields around them. 

Nor are they altogether neglectful of the means of education. Tbe 
mission schools are generally well attended by ready pupils, in no respect 
less backward than &e moro favored ones of other lands. It is not rare 
even, considering the smallness of their number, to meet among them with 
persons of liberal education and accomplishments. Their mode of dtem 
assimilates that of the whites, though, as yet, fashion has made comparip 
tively but small inroads. The unsophisticated eye would find prolific source 
for amusement in the uncouth appearance of their females on public occa- 
sions. Perchance a gay Indian maiden comes ilauntin^ past, with a huge 
fur-hat awkwardly placed upon her head, — embanded by broad strips of 
figured tin, instead of ribbons^ — and ears distended with large flattened 
rings of silver, reaching to her shoulders ; and bore another, solely habited 
in a long woUen under-dress, obtrudes to view, and skips along m all the 
pride and pomposity of a regular city belle ! Such are sights by no pieaos 
uncommon. 

These tribes have a regular civil government of their own, and all laws 
instituted for the general welfare are duly respected. They are, also, bo- 
coming more temperate in their habits, fully convinced that ardent spirits 
have hitherto proved the greatest enemy to tlie red man. The churches 
of various christain denominations, established among t^iem, are in a flour- 
ishing condition, and include with their members many whose Uvea of 
examplary piety adorn their professions. 

Taken as a whole, the several Indian tribes, occupying this beautifill 
and fertile section of country, are living witnesses to Uie softening and be- 
nign influences of enlightened christian effort, and furnish indubitable 
evidence of the susceptibility of the Aborigine for civihzation and im- 
provement. 



CHAPTER II. 



PuBpanOions for leaving— Scenes at Camp.— Things as they appeared.— Simplio- 
ity of mountaineers. — Sleep in the open air. — Character, habits, and fi? tlTimft of 
moontaineera. — Heterogeneous ingredients of Company. — ^The *«ftwi»T iv»T5lant.^ — Titk 
loate.— Comical exhibition and adventure with a Spanish company«-^Groae#<— 
Elm Grove. — ^A storm. — Santa Fe traderB.— Indian battle. 

After many vexatious delays and disappointments, the time was at length 
fixed for our departure, and leaving Independance on the ^ of September, 
I proceeded to join the encampment without the state line. It was nearly 
flight before I reached my destination, and the camp-fires were aliea^ 




Kaidbk. — Pmf at 



• •• 



ft 






• • 



« 



ft ft 



ft 
ft. 



• •• 

ft • 
_• ft 



ft 
ft 



ft 



8CENE8 AT CAMP. 91 

"^""LrLn jxnrLn-n-n.r.r i -n.rn.n-Lr nn-i i - ii -n-i i 1 " ----- — ----.- - .----« • ^AAMAMMMMMAMMAMMMAMAAMnnMMMi 

Ug)ited, in front of which the officiating cocA was bosily engifed inwepuw 
ing th« evening repast. To the windward were the dusky ioims or ten or 
fi^n men^— some standing, others sitting a la Turk, and others ha]^ 
reclinini^ or quietly extended at full length upon the ground^— watching 
the opeTEtive of the culinary department with great seeminff interest 

Enchairing myself upon a small log, I began to survey ue snrroundinff 
objects. In the back ground stood four Jarge Connestoga waggons, with 
ample canvass tops, and one dearborn, all tastefully drawn up in crescent 
form. To the right a small pyramid-shaped tent, with its snow-white 
covering, disclosed itself to the eye, and presented an air of comfort. To 
the left tbe caravan animals, securely picketed, at regular distances of some 
fifteen jrards apart, occupied an area of several acres. Close at hand a 
crystal streamlet traced its course, murmuring adown the valley ; and still 
beyond, a lovely grove waved its branches in the breeze, and contributed 
its willing mite to enliven and beautify the scene. The camp-fires in 
front, formed a kind of gateway to a small enclosure, shut in as above 
described. Here were congregated the company, or at least, that portion 
of it yet arrived. Some had dready spread their easily adjusted couches 
upon the ground, in readiness for the coming night, and seemed only await- 
ing supper to forget their cares and troubles in the sweet embrace of sleep. 

£very thing presented such an air of primitive simplicity not altogether 
estranged to comfort, I began to think it nowise marvellous that this 
mode of life should afibrd such strong attractions to those inured to it. 

Supper disposed of, the area within camp soon became tenanted by the 
devotees of slumber, — some snoring away most melodiously, and others 
conversing in an animated tone, now jovial, now grave, and at intervals, 
causing the night^r to resound with merry pods of laughter. At length 
the sleep-god began to assert his wonted supreoiacy, and silence in some 
measure reigned throughout camp. 

The bed of a mountaineer is an article nmther complex in its nature nor 
difficult in its adjustment. A single bufialo robe folded double and spread 
upon the ground, with a rock, or knoll, or some like substitute for a pillow, 
furnishes Uie sole base-work upon which the sleeper reclines, and, envel* 
oped in an additional bhmket or robe, contentedly enjoys his rest. Wishin|^ 
to initiate myself to the new mode of lifis before me, I was not slow to imi- 
tate the example of the promiscuous throng, kdA the liwse of a few moments 
found me in a Mr way to pass quite pleasantly my first night's repose in 
the open air. 

With the first gray of morning I arose refreshed and invigorated, nor 
even sufilered the lightest ill effect from my unusual exposure to a humid 
and unwholesome night-air. The whole camp, Boaa after, began to disclose 
a scene of cheerfulness and animation. The cattle and horses, unloosed 
fix>m their fastenings, and accompanied by keepers, were again permitted 
to roam at large, and in a short time were most industriously engaged in 
administering to the caUs of appetite. 

A^r bre&fast I improved me opportunity to look about and scan more 
closely the appearance of my compoffTums de voyage. This opened to vieW 
a new field for the study of men ana manners. ^ 

A mountain company generally comprises some quaint speeimeiiB of 
human nature, and, perhaps, few more so than the cme to wMdi I hcvt 

4 



38 CHARACTER AND COSTUME OF MOUNTAINEERS. 

introdnce the reader. To particularize would exceed my limit?, nor could 
I do full justice to the subject in band by dealing in generalities ; — how- 
ever, I yield to the latter. There are many crude originals mixed with the 
jprime ingredients of these companies. A genaiue mountaineer is a 
f problem bard to solve. He seems a kind of sui genus^ an oddity, both in 
dress, language, and appearance, from the rest of mankind. Associated 
with nature in her most simple forms by habit and manner of life, he 
gradually learns to despise tne restraints of civilization, and assimilates 
himself to the rude and unpolished character of the scenes with which he 
is most conversant. FrauK and open in his manners and generous in his 
disposition, he is, at the same time, cautious and reserved. In his franlmess 
he will allow no one to acquire an undue advantage of him, though in his 
generosity, he will oftentimes expend the last cent to assist a fellow in 
need. Implacable in his hatred, he is also steadfast in his friendship, and 
knows no sacrifice too great for the benefit of those he esteems. IVee as 
the pure air he breathes, and proudly conscious of his own independence, 
he will neither tyrannize over others, nor submit to be trampled u{X)n, — and 
is always prepared to meet the perils he may chance to encounter, with an 
undaunted front. Inured to hardship and deprivation, his wants are few, 
and he is the last to repine at the misfortunes wliich so often befall him. 
Patience becomes as it were interwoven with his very nature, and he sub- 
mits to the greatest disasters without a murmur. His powers of endurance, 
from frequent exercise, attain a strength and capacity almost incredible, — 
such as are altogether unlmown to the more delicately nurtured. His is a 
trade, to become master of which requires a long and faithful apprentice- 
ship. Of this none seems more conscious than himself, and woe to the 
*^ greenhorn" who too prematurely assumes to be "journeyman." His 
ioeas, his arguments, his illustrations, all partake of the unpolished sim- 
plicity of his associations ; though abounding often in tiie most vivid 
imagery, pointed inferences, and luminous expositions, they need a key to~ 
make them intelligible to the novice. 

His dress and appearance are equally singular. His skin, from 
constant exposure, assumes a hue almost as dark as tliat of the 
Aborigine, and his features and physical structure attain a rough and 
hardy cast His hair, through inattention, becomes lon£r, coarse, and 
bushy, and loosely dangles upon his shoulders. His head is surmounted 

S' a low crowned wool-hat, or a rude substitute of his own manufacture. 
is clothes are of buckskin, gaily fringed at the seams with strings of the 
same material, cut and made in a fashion peculiar to himself and asso- 
ciates. The deer and bufialo furnish him the required covering for his 
feet, which he fabricates at the impulse of want His waist is encircled 
with a belt of leather, holding encased his butcher-knife and pistols — ^whlle 
from his neck is suspended a bullet-pouch securely fastened to the belt in 
front, and beneath the ri^ht arm hangs a powder-horn transversely from his 
shoulder, behind which, upon the strap attached to it, are affixed his bullet- 
mould, ball-screw, wiper, awl, &c. With a gun-stick made of some 
Iiard wood, and a good rifie placed in his hands, carrying from thirty to 
tiiirty-five balls to the pound, the reader will have before him a correct like* 
u sess of a genuine mountaineer, when fully equipped. 

This costume prevails not only in the mountains proper, but also in the 



THE COXMANDAMT. 9» 

less settled poitioiis of Oregon and Califonwu The moontaineer is his own 
manu&cturer, tailor, shoemaker, and batcher ; and, fnlly accoatred and sap» 

Elied with ammonition in a good game coontry, he can always feed and clotbt 
imself, and enjoy all the comforts his situation afibrds. No wonder, then, 
his proud spirit, expanding with the intoitiTe knowledge of noble inde- 
pendence, becomes ^votedly attached to those regions and habits that per- 
mit him to stalk forth, a sovereign amid nature's kivliest works. 

Our company, however, were not all mountaineers ; some were only 
^ entered apprentices," and others mere *^gTeenhortu^ — ^taking every thing 
into consideration, perhaps, it was quite as agreeably composed as circum- 
stances would well admit of. In glancine over the crowd, I remarked 
several countenances sinister and malign, but consented to suppend judg- 
ment till the character of each should he proven by his conduct. Hence, 
in the succeeding pages, I shall only speak of characters as 1 have occa- 
sion to speak of men. As a whole, the party before me presented a choice 
collection of local varieties, — ^here was the native of France, of Canada, of 
England, of Hudson Bay, of Connecdcut, of Pennsylvania, of New York* 
of Kentucky, of Illinois, of Missouri, and of the Rocky Mountains, all 
congregated to act in unison for a specified purpose. It m'ght well require 
tlie pencil of Hogarth to picture such a motlev group. 

Our company liad not as yet attained its full numercial strength ; a small 
division of it was some distance in advance, another behind, and at least 
two days would be necessary to complete the arrangements prior to leaving. 
The idea of spending two days in camp, notwithstanding the beauty of its 
location, was by no means agreeable; but as the case was beyond remedy, 
I quietly submitted, and managed to while away the tedious interval as best 
I could. 

A brief acquaintance with our commandant, found him a man of small 
stature and gentlemanly deportment, though savoring somewhat of arro- 
gance and self-sufficiency, — faults, by the way, not uncommon in little 
men. He had been engaged in the Indian trade for several years past, and 
had seen many '*nps and downs" in former life. Graduating fifom 
West Point in his younger days, he soon after received the commission of 
Lieutenant of Dragoons, in the U. 9^ Army, and served in that capacity for 
some six or eight years, on the frontier and at Forts Gibson and LeaveiH 
worth. Possessed of the confidence of his men, his subsequent resignation 
was the occasion of much regret with those he had been accustomed to 
command. The private soldier loved him for his generous frankness and 
readiness to overlook minor oflences, even upon uie first show of peni- 
tence. 

Such unbounded popularity at length excited the jealousy of his brother 
officers, and gave birth to a combination against him, which nothing could 
appease short of his removal from the army. Aware of his ardent tem- 
perament and strong party notions as a politician, and equally violent upon 
the opposite side, they managed to inveigle him into a discussion of the 
measures and plans of the then administration of national affairs. Argn- 
ing in the excitement of feeling, he made use of an un^ruarded expression, 
denouncing the Chief Magistrate. This was immediately noted down, 
and charges were promptly preferred against him, for ** abuse of a superior 
officer P^ The w hole affiiir was then referred to a Court Martial, composed 



40 COMICAL APPEARANCE OF A MEXICAN COMPANY. 

tzclosively of political opponents. The evidence was so strong he had 
little to expect 0*001 their hands, and consequently threw up his commission, 
to avert tiie disgrace of being cashiered^ since which he has been engaged 
in his present business. 

He appeared to be a man of general information, and well versed in 
science and literature. Indeed, I felt highly gratified in making an acquain- 
tance so far congenial to my own taste. 

An accession of two waggons and four men having completed our 
number, the morning of Septemb^ 4th was ushered in with the din of 
preparations for an immediate start. The ladin? of the waggons was then 
severally overhauled and more compactly adjusted, and our arms were depos- 
ited ^ith other freight until such time as circumstanoes should call for them. 
All was hurry and confusion, and ofttimes the sharp tone of angry dispute 
arose above the jargon of the tumultuous throng- 

At length the word was given to advance, and in an instant the whole 
caravan was in motion ; tliuse disconnected with the waggons, mounted 
upon horseback, led the van, followed by the teams and their attendants in 
Indian file, as the loose cattle and horses brought up tlie rear. The scene 
to me portrayed a novelty quite amusing. I began to think a more comical- 
looking set could scarcely be found any where ; but the events of the day 
soon convinced me of mv mistake. 

Travelling leisurely along lor some six or eight miles, strange objects 
were seen in the distance, which^ on nearer approach, proved a company 
of Mexican traders, on their way to Independence tor an equipment of goods. 
As they filed past us, I had full scope for the exercise of my risibilities. 

If a mountaineer and a mountain company are laughable objects, a 
Mexican and a Mexican company are triply so. The first thing that excites 
attention upon mee Jng one of this mongrel race, is his ludicrous apology 
for pantaloons. This is generally made of deer or bufilalo skin, sioiilar to 
our present fiishion, except the legs, which are left unsewed from the thigh 
downwards ; a loose pair of cotton drawers, cut and made in like manner, 
and worn beneath, imparts to his every movements a most grotesque appear- 
ance, leaving at each step of the wearer his denuded leg, with that of his 
pantaloons on one side, and drawers o^||die other, fluttering in the breeze! 
The next thing that meets the gaze, is nis black, slouching, broad-brimmed 
hat, (sombrero!) though little darker than the features it obscures, and ftr 
less so than the coarse, jet-colored hair that protrudes from beneath it, and 
&lls confusedly upon his shoulders. Next, if the weather tolerates the 
habit, a coarse parti-colored blanket (charape) envelopes the body, from hb 
shoulders downwards, fixed to its place by an aperture in the centre through 
which the head is thrust, and securely girted at pleasure by a waist-bond 
of leather. His arms, if arms he has, consist of a rude bow and arrows I 
slung to his back, or an old fusee, not unfrequently witiiout flint, lock, or 
ammunition ; but doubly armed, and proudly, too. is he who can carry a good 
rifle with powder and lead— even if he 6e ignorant of their use. 

Thus appearing, these creatures, some mounted upon mules, with hea;vy 
attached to tbeir heels, (bearing gafls an inch and a halt' in length, jin- 
in response to the rolUng motions of the wearer,) ensconced in bundling 
ish saddles, (finished with such ample leather skirts as almost hid the 
duninutive animal that bore them, and large wooden stirrups, some three 





Waook Tbajii. — Ptgt 10. 



%. • • • • 

* • • » • 

ft * V « « 

• • • • 



'ft • 



* 



k V ^ 






• • 






A8TORJL 

inches broad,) were ridinj^ at their ease ; while others, half naked, wmi 
trudging along on foot, driving their tel^n8, or following the erratic mnlet 
of the caravan, to heap upon them the ready maledictions of their peoliifio 
vocabulary. Passing on, we were accosted : 

'* Como lo pasa, cabelleros ?'* 

The salutation was returned by a simple nod. 

" Habia la lengua Espanola, senors ?" 

A shake of the head was the only response. 

'' £s esta el camino de Independenca 7 

No reply. 

" Carraho ! Que quantos jomadas tenemos en la camino de IndeptD* 
denca ?" 

Still no one answered. 

'* Scha ! Maldijo tualmas ! Los Americanos esta dtjabelo !" 

By this time the crowd had passed and left us no longer annoyed by Its 
presence. The conclusion irresistibly forced itself upon my mind, ** if 
these are true specimens of Mexicans, it is no wonder they incite both the 
pity and contempt of the rest of the world." Subsequent intercourse with 
them, however, has served to convince me that first impressions, in this 
case, instead of exceeding the reality, fell fiir short of the true mark ! 

Continuing our course, we saw large numbers of prairie-hens, and suc- 
ceeded in killing several. These birds assimilate the English grouse in 
appearance, and are of a dusky-brown color, — with short tails, and narrow- 
peaked wings, — and little less in size than the domestic fowl. Their flesh 
is tender and of superior flavor. When alarmed, they start with a cack- 
ling noise, and whiz through the air not unlike the paitridee. They are 
very numerous on the frontier prairies, and extend to the Rocky Moun- 
tains, Oregon, California and New Mexico. 

About sundown we reached a small creek known as Elm Grove, and 
encamped for the night, with every indication of an approaching storm. 
Strict orders were accordingly given for securing the animals, and the 

Srocess of ^* picketing" was speedily under way. This consisted in 
riving small stakes (** pickets") firmly into the ground, at proper dis- 
tances apart, to which the animals were severally tied by strong cords^— « 
plan that should find nightly practice among all travellers of the grand 
prairies, to prevent those losses which, despite the utmost precaution, will 
not unfrequently occur. 

Timber proved quite scarce in this vicinity, and it was with great difficulty 
we procured sufficient for cooking purposes. The men now began to 
prepare for the coming storm. Some disposed of themselves in, and 
others under, the waggons, makin? barricades to the windward ; others 
erected shantees, by means of slender sticks, planted in parallel rows five 
or six feet apart, and interwoven at the tops, so as to form an arch of 
suitable height, over which was spread a roofage of robes or blanketsy— 
while others, snugly eni>conced beneath the rc^dy pitched tent, bade de- 
fiance to wind and weather. 

Being one of those selecting a place under the waggons, I retired at an 
early hour to snooze away the night ; send despite the anticipations of an 
unpleasant time, I soon lost myself in a sweet slumber, utterly uncon- 
scious of every thing around me. In thoughts I wandered back to the 



44 AN INDIAN BATTLE. 

borne of my childhood, to converse with friends whose names and featam 
ftmd memofy has chained to my heait, while imagination roamed with 
delight amid those scenes endeared to me by earliest and most cherished 
recollections. But all the sweet pencillings of fancy were at once spoiled 
by the uncivil intrusion of a full torrent ot water, that came pourin£^ from 
the hill-side and forced its impetuous way into the valley below,— deluging 
me from head to foot in its descent My condition, as the reader may 
well suppose, was far from being enviable. However, resolved to make 
the best of a bad thing, after wrmging the water from my drenched bed- 
ding, I selected another spot and again adjusted myself to pass the dreary 
interval till morning ; this I succeed in doing, — how or in what num- 
ner, it is unnecessary to say. Sleep was utterly out of the question, and 
I am quite sure I never liailed the welcome mom with greater delight 
than on this occasion. 

Others of the company fared almost as bad as myself^ pnd tliere was 
scarcely a dry bed in camp. But the little concern evinced by the moun- 
taineers for their mishap, surprised me most. They crawled from their 
beds, reeking with wet, as good humoredly as though tlieir nocturnal bath 
•had in no wise disturbed their equanimity, or impaired their comfort. 

The morning proved so disagreeable two of our party, who were accompa- 
nying us for the purpose of adventure, concluding this a kind of adventure 
they were unwilling to meet, wisely resolved to take the back track, aod 
accordingly left for home. Towards night the rain ceased, and, the clouds 
having dispersed, we were again en roiUe, Travelling on till late, we 
encamped in the open prairie, and early the next morning resumed our 
course. Having reached a small creek, about 10 o'clock, we halted for 
breakfast, where another Santa Fe company came up. This proved a 
party of Americans, with some six or eight waggons and a large number 
of horses and mules, on their homeward journey. 'I'hey had also in their 
possession an elk nearly full grown, two black-tailed deer,* an antelope 
and a white-tailed fawn. 

Through them we received intelligence of a battle recently fought be- 
tween the Pawnee and Arapaho Indians, at the lower (^imarone tSprings, 
south of the Arkansas. The former had been defeated with greai 
slaughter, — losing their horses and seventy-two of tlieir bravest war- 
riors, to increase tlie trophies and enliven the scajp-dknces of their ene- 
mies. This action occurred directly upon the Santa Fe trail, and the dead 
yet bestrewed tlie prairie, as our inlormants passed, half devoured by 
wolves, and filling the air with noisome stench as they wasted beneatb 
the influence of a scorching sun. 

An approving murmur ran through the crowd while listening to tlie re- 
cital, and all united to denounce tlie Pawnees as a dangerous and villan- 
OUB set, and wished for their utter extermination. { 

* The black-tailed deer are larg[er than the common deer, and are found only in 
the snow-mountains. For a description of them the reader is referred to subsequeut 



45 



CHAPTER III. 

Hm Pottowatomies^-^roHfaif the WakuoudiB^— Adventnie at tlia 8pniigi.»Tb» 
Caw chie£ — Kanaaa river and Indiani.— Pfeadiag lor whkkey.— Hickory tmilwr. 
— Pnirie tea.— Scenes at the N. Fork of Blue.— Wild booey.— Retuni party.— 
MonntaineeTB in California. — ^AdventurB with a boflalo.— Indian atiocitifle.— 
liqnor and the For Trade.— Strict gvaid.— High prices. 

CoNTDHTiNa our course, we bore to the rght, and struck the noitfaem 
or Platte trail, and, after travelling eight or ten miles, made camp upcMi a 
small creek skirted with heavy timber, called Black Jack. An early start 
the next morning brought us to the Wakarousha, a considerable tributary 
c€ the Kansas, where a junction was formed with our advance party. The 
territory lying upon this stream as ftur south as Council Grove, Oi noted 
place on the Mexican trail, 144 miles west from Independence,) oelongs 
to the Pottowatomies. These Indians are very wealthy and are partial!^ 
civilized, — ^the most of them being tillers of the ground. Their dwellings 
are of very simple construction,— large strips of bark firmly tied to a 
frame-work of poles with small apertures to admit light, furnishing the ex- 
terior, while the interior is finished by the suspension of two or three 
blanketo between the apartments, as partitions, and erecting a few scafK>lds 
for bedsteads. The iire-place in warm weather is out of doors, but in 
tlie winter it occupies the centre of the bu'lding, from which the smoke- 
unaided by jamb or chsmney — is left to find its way through an opening 
in the roof. Some, however, are beginning to improve in their style of 
architecture, and now and then we fimi a tolerably spacious and comfoitar 
Ue house among them. 

The Catholics have several missionaries with this tribe, and are using 
great exertions, if not to ameliorate their ccmditiou, at least, to prosel^ 
uem to their own peculiar faith. The missionaries of other ^christian 
denominations are also devoting themselves for their benefit, and not nn- 
fi^quently with gratifying success. 

The remainder of the day was occupied in crossing the creek — a task 
by no means easy, — ^its banks being so precipitous we were compelled to 
lower our waggons by means of ropes. In so doing it reauired the utmost 
caution to prevent ttiem from oversetting or becoming broken in the ab- 
rupt descent 

The night following was passed upon the opposite bank. After travel- 
ling some twelve miles the next day, we encamped a short distance to the 
right of the trail, at a place known as the Springs. Scarcely had we 
haltod when two footmen appeared from an opposite direction — one of 
them leading a horse— whom a nearer advance proved to be a white man 
and an Indian. The former was immediately recognized by our engages 
as an old acquaintance, by the name of Brown, who luul been their recent 
compagnon de voyage from the mountains. His story was soon told. A 
few days subsequent to his arrival in the States, a difficulty had occurred j 



46 KANSAS INDIANS. 

between him and another person, who received a severe wound firom a 
knife by the hand of Brown- during the af!ray, when the latter was be* 
cessitated to consult his own safety oy a hurried flight. He accordingly 
bade farewell both to enemies and law, and left for the Indian countiy — 
travelling most of the way by night, 'i'wo weeks afterwards he arrived 
in the Kansas nation, and remauied with the Indian now accompanying 
him, to await our return. 

Having listened to his story, I began to survey his strange companion. 
He was a village chief of the Kansas (Caw) tribe, and the tirst of his race 
I had ever seen so nearly drpssed in his native costume. In person he 
was tall and stout-built, — with broad shoulders and chest, brawny arms 
and legs, and features evincing the uncontaminated blood of the Aborigi- 
ne. His hair was closely shaved to the scalp, with the exception of a 
narrow tuft centrewise from forehead to crown, so trimmed it stood on end 
like the bristles of a warring hog; then his whole head and face were so 
lavishly bedaubed with vermilion, our experienced city belles would doubt- 
less have considered it an unpardonable waste of that useful material! 

A string of beare'-claws, tastefully arranged, encircled his neck, while 
ample folds of brass wire above the wrists and elbows furnished his armil- 
lary, and from his ears hung rude ornaments,— some of silver, others of 
brass or iron — cruelly distending the flexible members that bore them. A 
dirty white blanket drawn closely around the shoulders enveloped the 
body, which, witli a breech-cloth and leggins, formed his sole covering. A 
bow and arrows, slung to his back by a strap passing over the left shoal* 
dec and under the riffht arm, were his only weapons. A belt, begirtinff 
the waist, sustainecf his tobacco-pouch and butcher-knife, and completed 
his attire and armament. 

Thus habited appeared before us the Caw chief, holding in one hand the 

lead-rope of his horse, and in the other the wing of a wild turkey, with a 

a long-stemmed pipe, carved from a hard red stone, handsomely wrought and 

finely polished. Taken altogether, he presented an amusing spectacle— ^ 

.. a real curiosity. 

Having shaken hands with the company and turned his horse to graze, in 
a few moti^^nts his pipe was subjected to its destined use, and, as the inhaled 
fumes merrily curved from his mouth and nostrils, he ever and anon pre- 
sented it for the indulgence of the bystanders. His knowledge of English 
was limited to the simple monosyllaole '' good," which he tooK occasion to 
pronounce at intervals as he thought proper. 

Sept. Sth, Continuing on, we encamped towards night at a small creek 
within six miles of the crossing of the Kansas river. Here a bevy of our 
chiefs villagers, rigged in their rude fashion, came flocking up, apparently 
to gratify their curiosity in gazing at us, but really in expectation of some 
trifling presents, or in quest of a favorable opportunity for indulging 
their inate propensities for theft. However, they found little encourage- 
ment, as the vigilance of our guards more than equalled the cunning of our 
visitors. During their stay we were frequently solicited for donations of 
tobacco and ammunition, (as they expressed it,) in payment for passing 
through their country. This was individually demanded with all the assu- 
lance of government revenue oflicers, or the keepers of regular toll-bridges» 
ittongly reminding one of the petty nations upon the borderz of Caiuuui 




The Caw Caixi. — paf «. 



/I 



ft •• 



ft 



- • • ,ft 
• • ft •• 

* - ft ,* • 

* • ft ft 









ft ft 


ft • 


« 


ft 


ft ft 


ft ft 


• 


• /• 


ft ft 


• ft 


ft 


:-: 


* ft 


ft ft 


ft 


• ft 


'*! •••••• 


ft 


• 


* 


• ft • 


ft 
ft 


ft 
• 


ft . ft 



m ^ 



• « ft ft 



PLEADING FOR WHISKEY. 49 



<ffnftnOftrtf WW^AAJX < ^'WWWWWu''^"yv^^ r>r~ -I n n o r-1 — irv — — i — — —— — --■» ^ii^^t^^»,m^ ^ 



that requiied tribute of the Israelites passing taiough tiiem to possess the 
kiid of their forefathers. 

Sept, 9th. Earlj in the forenoon we came to the Kansas, and were em- 
ployed till nearly ni^rht in eflecting a ford. Tliis proved rather difficult, as 
the water was deep and tae bottom sandy ; — ^the course, bearing directly 
across, till near midwny of the river, follows the comnt for six or eight 
hundred yards, and then turns abruptly to the opposite shore. The Kansas, 
at the crossing, was not far from six hundred yards wide, with steep banks 
of clay and sand. The folding accomplished, we travelled some six miles, 
and encamped for the night. Our visitors yet honored us with their pres- 
ence ; some, under pretence of tmding horses ; others, of bartering for 
tobacco, whiskey, co^e, and ammunition ; but most of them for the real 
purpose of beg<ring and stdaling. 

The Cuw Indians are a branch of the Osage tribe — speaking the same 
language, and identified by the same manners and customs. They num- 
ber a population of sixteen hundred, and claim all the territory west of the 
Delaware, Shawnee, and Poltowatomie line, to the head waters of the 
Kansas. Their main village is on the left bank of the river, a few miles 
above the crossing. Their houses are built Pawnee fashion, being coni- 
form and covered with a thick coat of dirt, presenting a hole at the apex to 
emit the smoke, and another at the side to serve the double purpose of a 
door and window. The whole building describes a complete circle, in 
whose centre is placed the hearth'^re, ara at the circumference the couches 
of its inmates. Its floor is the bare ground, and its ceiling the ffrass, brash, 
and poles which uphold the superincumbent earth forming Uie roof and 
aides. 

The Caws are generally a lazy and slovenly people, raising but little 
com, and scarcely any vegetables. For a living they depend mostly upon 
the chase. Their regular hunts are in the summer, fiul, and winter, at 
which time they all leave for the buffiilo range, and return laden with a 
full supply of choice provisions. The robes and skins thus obtained, 
fumish their clothing uid articles for traffic. 

As yet, civilization has made but small advances among them. Some, 
however, are tolerably well educated, and a Protestant mission established 
with them, is beginnm^ its slow but successful operations for their good^- 
while two or three fiumlies of half-breeds, near by, occupy neat houses, and 
have splendid forms and improvements, thus aflbniing a wholesome contrast 
to the poverty and misery of their rude neighbors. 

The distance from Independence to this place, by the mountain trail, is 
some eighty miles, over a beautiful and fertue country, which I shall here- 
after take occasion to notice more fully. Before leaving, we were furtlier 
inaceased by the accession of two Canyadian va^ageurs — French of course. 
Our force now numbered some twenty-four— one sufficiently formidable for 
all the dangers of the route. 

Sept. lOiL Resuming our way, we proceeded till late at night, still 
attended by our Indian fnends ; (not the originals, but a ** fr w more of the 
aame scxt, ' who kindly supplied their places,— seeking to lev^ fresh drafts 
iipoii patience and generosity.) These were more importunate lor liquor than 
aiqr preceding them — though, in fiict, the whole nation is nowise remiss in 
tbur devotion to King Alcohol. One feUow, in particular, exhausted all hia 



V 



fO SCENES AT NORTH PORK OF BLUE. 

ingennity to obtain the wherewith to ** toet his whistle,*^ He was a shtth 
el'?aced old man, and occasioned much sport, from his supplications in 
broken English, which ran pretty much as follows: 

^ Big man, me. Chief, — ^Black Warrior. Me, American soldier ! Love 
Americans, heap. Big man, me! Love whiskey, heap. White man 
good. Whiskey good. Love whiskey, me,— -drink heap whiskey. No 
give me whiskey drink ? Me, Chief. Me, American. Me, Black War- 
rior. Heap big man, me! Love Americans. Take him hand, shake. 
White man good. Whiskey eood. Me love whiskey ! Love him heap ! 
No give Black Warrior whiskey ? No 7— one leetle drink ? Whiskey 
good. Me love him. Make Black Warrior strong. Big man, me, — 
Chief. American soldier. Me love American. Shake him hand. Fight 
him, bad Indian, no love white man. Kill him. White man good. Me 
love white man. Whiskey good. Me love whiskey. No give Black 
Warrior whiskey, — one leetlo drink ? Me, ChieL Big man, me." Etc 

In this strain the old fellow continued so long as he found listeners, but 
without success, although, as I afterwards learned, two waggons were 
freighted with the noxious article ; none of it was suffered to Imd its way 
down the throats of our thirsty guests. 

Pursuing a westerly course, nearly parallel with the Kansas, for three 
successive days, we passed the 14tb encamped at Big Vermilion, for the 

Eurpose of procuring a quantity of hickory for gun-sticks and bow-timbef. 
[ickory is unknown to the Rocky Mountains, and this being the last place 
on the route affording it, each of our company took care to provide himself 
with an extra gun-stick. Small pieces, suitable for bows, find market 
among the mountain Indians, ranging at tlie price of a robe each, 
while gun-sticks command one dollar apiece, from the hunters and trap- 
pers. 

We were also careful to provide an extra quantity of ox-bows, axJe-trees, 

&c., as a resource in case of accidents or breakage. These are articles 

with which every caravan should be furnished on a journey across the 

grand prairies. 

In this vicinity a species of shrub, which I had before noticed in various 

5 laces, (designated as " red-root" by our voyageurs,) became quite abundant 
i'he red-root is highly esteemed as a substitute for tea, and my own expe- 
rience attests its superiority of flavor to any article of that kind imported 
from China. In appearance it is very similar to the tea of commerce, and 
it aflbrds at all times a most excellent beverage. It is found only upon the 
prairies between the frontiers and Big Blue, and in some portions of the 
Rocky Mountains. 

Leaving Big Vermilion, we travelled rapidly the two days subsequent^ 
and arrived at the North Fork of Blue, — a laree and deep stream, tributary to 
the Kansas. We were here detained till uie 24th— the creek being im- 
passable on account of high water. 

However, the beauty of the place and variety of its landscape scenery, 
served in a great measure to alleviate the weariness of delay. The com^ 
try was most agreeably interspersed with hills, uplands, and dales— «i!i|ify 
watered and variegated with woods and prairies, attired in all the g«ri|r 
loveliness of wild-flowers. The busy bee, afraid of the cruel perseoutii 
of man, had here sought a secure retreat to pursue, unmolested, 



ADVENTURE WITH A BUFFALO. 61 



*"* --"**—**-■-■ - — — — I - r- i - i i nru-LTiru-Lnj-ij-LrurLru^Jijn r>r>ri r«~i i ""^ """" * ^"^ " "■^'^'n rirT 



melUferoos employ, and fill the dark chambers of her oaken palaces year 
by year with honeyed stores. The air was almost vocal with the music of 
her wings, and the flowerets were enlivened by the gentle touches of her 
embrace. The odor of honey filled the breeze, which, wafting th^ min^rled 
melody of birds and insects with the incense of flowers, o^er tho smiling 
prairie till lost in space, seemed more like the breath of Eden thau the 
exhalations of earth. 

As mi^ht be supposed, we were not slow in levying n|x>n the delicious 
stores, which the mdustrious insects, claiming this as their dominion, h:id 
laid away for themselves. During our stay no less than four bcc-irees 
were levelled, and every pan, kettle, pail, keg, or empty dish in the whole 
camp was filled to overflowing, and every stomach to repletion, witli honey 
of almost crystalline transparency. The great abundance of deer, turkey, 
and other game in the vicmity, also contributed their share of amusement, 
and enlivened the interval of detention. 

At length, by a partial subsidence of the water, we were enabled to eflect 
a crossing aixd renew our journey. Pursuing a course W. N. W., on the 
27th we met a small party of whites on their return from the mountains, 
and, yielding to the temptation presented by a luxuriant and well-wooded 
valley, with a pretty streamlet, the two parties made common camp. Our 
new acquaintances were taking a large drove of horses, and several do- 
mesticated bufllilo, with them to the States. Their horses had been mostly 
obtained from Upper California, the year previous, by a band of mountain- 
eers, under the leatd of one Thompson. This band, numbering twenty-two 
in all, had made a descent upon the Mexican ranchos and captured between 
two and three thousand head of horses and mules. ' A corps of some sixty 
Mexican cavalry pursued and attacked them, but were defeated and pursued 
in turn, with the loss of several mules and their entire camp equipaire : 
after which the adventurers were permitted to regain their mountain homes, 
without further molestation ; but, in passing the cheerless desert, between 
tiie Sierra Nevada and Colorado, the heat, dust, and thirst were so in- 
tolerably oppressive, that full one half of their animals died. The remain- 
der, however, were brought to rendezvous, and \'arionsly disposed of, to suit 
to wants and wishes of their captors. 

The buffalo, in possession of our wajrfaring friends, had been caught 
while calves, and reared by domestic cows. They appeared as tame and 
easily managed as other cattle. One of them, a two-yea^old heifer, was 
rather vicious in its habits, having been spoiled, while a calf, by the too 
great familiarity of its keeper. After listening to a full exposition of its 
bad qualities, our commandant oflered to bet he could handle, or even ride, 
the unruly beast at pleasure. 

^ Can you ?" said the owner. " Do it, and my best horse is yours !" 

*^ I take all such ofSsrs !" returned the commandant * <* A horse could 
not be easier earned !" he continued, stepping towards the ill-tutored ani- 
mal. *• Conie, boss ! — ^Poor boss ! — bossy, bossy !" addressing the bufiEilo, 
which, commenced advancing, — at first slowly, then, with a sudden bound, 
ran full tilt against the admirer, leaving him prostrate upon the ground, as 
it ttnrned away, dancing and throwing its heels exultingly at the exploit. 

** Bless my stars !" he exclaimed, ou recovering himself; " Fd no idea 
^twould serve me so V* 



52 LIQUOR AND THE FUR TRADE. 

** Ha, ha, ha !" retorted the owner. ** You seem to pick upon a strange 
place for a snooze i What in the world were you doing before that skittiflb 
beast?" 

The roar of laughter which followed, told how well the joke was relished 
by the crowd. 

Reports from the mountains brought intelligence of recent difficulties 
between the whites and Sioux,— 4he latter having murdered several trajn 
pers. A battle had also been fought in the Snake country, in which the 
Sionx were defeated with a loss of twenty killed and wounded, — ^the whites 
suffered in the loss of their leader (Frapp) and four others. Another 
affiur had come oS, at Fort Platte, between two Actions of that tribe, while 
on a drunken spree, resulting in the death of Schena-Chischille, their 
chief, and several of his party. 

The most acceptable item of intelligence was the probability of our 
reaching the bufialo range in ten days, at least, where we should find vast 
quantities of those animals. This led our vuyageurs to expatiate anew 
upon the choice varieties of the feast of good things we might expect on 
that occasion. 

Bidding adieu to our transient camp-mates, we were soon again en route. 
The day following, being unfit for travel, was devoted to t>verhauling and 
re-adjusting the freight of the wagons. Here, for the first time, I ascei^ 
tained the £iict, that a portion ot the above consisted of no less thak 
twenly'four barrels (f tdccholy designed for the Indian trade ! 

This announcement may occasion surprise to many, when aware that 
the laws of Congress prohibit, under severe penalties, the introduction 
of liquor among the Indians, as an article of trafiic, — subjecting the of^ 
fender to a heavy fine and confiscation of effects. Trading companies, 
however, find ways and means to smu^le it tlirough, by the waggon-load, 
under the very noses of government <%cers, stationed along the frontiers 
to enforce the observance of laws. 

I am irresistibly led to the conclusion, that these gentry are wilfully neg- 
ligent of their duty ; and, no doubt, there are often weighty inducemenU 
presented to them to shut their eyes, close their ears, and avert their faces, 
to let the guilty pass unmolested. It seems ahnost impossible that a bfind 
man, retaining the senses of smell, taste and hearing, could remain igno- 
rant of a thing so palpably plain. The alcohol is put into waggons, at 
Westport or Inidependence, in open day'light, and taken into the territory, 
in open day ligj^j where it remains a week or more awaiting the arrivsil of 
its owners. Two Grovemment agents reside at Westport, while six or 
eight companies of Dragoons are stationed at Fort Leavenworth, ostensibly 
for the purpose of protecting the Indians and suppressing this infamous 
traffic, — ana yet it suffers no diminution from their vigilance! What 
faithful public officers ! How prompt in the discharge of their tohoU 
duty! 

These gentlemen cannot plead ignorance as an excuse. They wdl 
know that alcohol is one of the principal articles in Indian trade—this &ct 
is notorious — no one pretends to deny it ; not even the traders themselves-^ 
and yet, because no one takes the trouble to produce a specimen of the 
kind of freight taken, more or less, by all mountain companies, and fobcb 
them to see, taste, touch, and smeU, they aflfect ignorance ! It is thus the 



HIGH PRICES. 63 

benevolent desispis of our Government are consammated by these peDaicn* 
ers upon the public treasury ! 

Had they tne will so to do, it would be no diflicult matter to put a atop 
to all Buch exportations. The departure of any one of these oompanies 
for the mountains, is a thing too difficult to be effected unknown and 
stealthily. It becomes public talk for days and even weeks previous. 
Scarcely anytiiing would be easier than for those whose business it is, to 
keep on the look out, and enforce the law to its full extent upon each o^ 
fcnaer. A few examples of this kind would interpose an insuperable bar- 
rier to the further prosecution of an illicit traffic in the manner it is at 
S resent carried on. A few fiiithful public officers, and attentive to their 
uty, regardless of fear orjfavor, would soon ac^wmplish an object so de- 
Birabie. 

In subsequent pages of this work I shall have occasion to notice a few 
of the manv evils resulting from this criminal neglect/— but at present 
forbear further remarks. 

Our arms were now put in order for immediate usej—eaeh individual ap- 
portioning to himself a good supply of ammunition, to be ready at all times 
m case of attack. Guards were ordered to be constantly on the a]eit. 
The company was divided into two partiesy— one for day and the other for 
night ffuard, and these again were subdivided fur alternate relieves, — thus, 
one of each subdivision serving a day and a night, and the reserve the 
day and night Buc<;eeding. The day-guard consisted of only two persons, 
upon duty every otlier day, but the night-guard numbered ten^ — two being 
on duty for two hours were then relieved by the two next in succession, 
and they by the next, and so on. 

Strict oniers were also given to prevent any from leaving camp, or part- 
ing from the caravan whife travelling* In tact, every thiuff began to as- 
sume a warli Jce aspect, as if we were really in danger ana apprehensive 
of an immediate rencxionter. 

Several boxes of ckithinff, &c., were also opened for such as wished to 
purchase. But every article disposed of was sold at an enormous rate : 
tobacco bringing from one to three dollars per lb., according to quality ; 
butcher-knives, from one dollar to one fifty each; hose, one dollar per 
pair ; shirts, from three to five dolbuns each, acconiing to quality ; blank- 
ets, from twelve to sixteen dollars ; coats, from fifteen to forty dollars; 
coarse shoes, four dollars per pair ; six-penny calicoes, fifty cts. per yd.; 
beads, one dollar per bunch, etc. These were of an indifferent quality, 
and afibrded the vender some three or four hundred per cent advance 
upon purchase-price. In fact, with r^ard to prices, conscience had no- 
thing to do with the matter, 

6* 



M 



CHAPTER IV. 

Country from tho ftontien to Big Blue, its geological character, Sac. — ^Xovel core for 
fever and ague. — ^Indian trails.— Game. — Sage rabbits. — Antelope, and their pe- 
culiarities. — Beaver cuttings. — Big Blue and its vicinity. — Dangerous country.— 
Pawner bravery.— Night-alarm, (Prairies on fire.)— Platte river. — Predominant 
characteristics of the Grand Prairies, and theory explanatory of their phenome- 
non.— Something to laugh at—** Big Jim," and the antelope. 

Sept. 2Sth. We are now camped upon a small creek, nearly destitnte 
of timber, within two miles of Big Blue, or the N. VV. branch of the 
Kansas river. The geography of this part of the country is incorrectly 
described upon all the published maps I have yet seen. The Republican 
Fork, which is the principal branch of the Kansas, is uniformly represented 
as the most northwesterly branch of that river, forming a junction with it . 
at or below the usual crossing. This is not the case. 

The two forks of Blue, from the northwest, united, form a large aimi 
important stream, which, according to my impression, discharges its waters 
into the Kansas itself, and not into the Republican. Of this, however, I 
am not quite positive. But be that as it may, admitting the Republican to 
be the main stream. Big Blue must be, as a matter of course, the moeH 
northwesterly branch of the Kansas river. 

Proceeding up the Blue, the geolo^cal character of the country undei^ 
goes an entire and radical change, ana the traveller is introduced to a diiiisr- 
ent order of things from that previously observed. 

Perhaps, therefore, it is not out of place to present a general review of 
the territory thus far. 

The interval from the frontier of Missouri to Big Blue, a distance up- 
wards of two hundred milefs, affi)rds great uniformity in all its more promi- 
nent characteristics. It generally comprises beautifally undulating prai- 
ries, of a moist argillaceous soil, rich in sedimentary aeposites and vege- 
table matter. It is somewhat rocky in places, but well watered by the 
almost innumerable streams that find their way into the Kansas, Platte 
and Arkansas rivers. The creeks, with but few exceptions, are heavily 
timbered with oak, hickory, walnut, maple, cottonwood, and odier varieties 
found in more eastern forests. The hills too, in some parts, are more 
than usually abundant in springs, and covered witli stately groves, as taste- 
fully arranged as if planted by the hand of man, while luxuriant grass 
and fragrant flowers usurp the place of underbrush. The prairies, hem- 
med in on every side by the woodlands skirting the water-courses, present 
to the eye proud oceans of flowery verdure, tossing their wavelets to the 
breeze and perfuming the air with the breath of spring. 

The streams are clear, with rocky or pebbly bottoms and high, steep 
banks— abounding in choice specimens of the finny tribes and varieties of 
the testaceous order, of tlie genus muscula. The valley of the Kansas is 



SAGE lUBBITS. 05 

wide and of a deep brown vegetable mould, sosceptible of a high state of 
cultivation. The whole country is well adapted to the doable purpose of 
agriculture and the growth of stock. 

The prevailing rock is sandstone of various shades and compactness, 
with siliceous and fossiliferous limestone. These specifications are gene- 
rally exhibited io a detached snd fragmentary form, but rarely in strata aa 
disclosed upon the surface. 

Taken as a whole, the territory holds out many inducements to emi- 
grants, and, whenever brought into market, will no doubt become speedily 
and thickly populated.* 

Sept. ZOtJu We are again under headway. A French en^rage, who 
had been suflering for several days past from a severe attack of the fever 
and ague, experienced a sudden and novel cure. Unable to travel, quar- 
ters were prepared for him in one of the whiskey waggons, where he was 
comfortably disposed of as we continued our course. In pa^^sing a rough 
place the waggon overset, when out came the invalid head foremost, and 
(ml came the whiskey barrels showering full upon him ! The suddenness 
of the fall, with the surprise and excitement of the occasion, — one, or both, 
or all, or some other cause unknown, effected a complete cure, — for cer- 
tain it is, he did not suffer another attack of the fever and ague during 
the whole journey, and the next day w^able to discharge his duties as 
well as ever. 

On striking the Big Blue, the mountain road bears a north-northwest 
course to the head of that stream, and from thence over an iiiterval of high- 
lands to the Platte river. The distance travelled up the Blue requires some 
eight days, for heavy wagons. Continuing our way, about noon we passed 
aeveral Indian trails, in addition to one ten or twelve or fifteen miles back. 
These consist of a number of well-beaten, parrallel foot-paths, bearing a 
northwest and southwest direction. They are formed by the passing and 
repassing of the Otoes, lowas, and Foxes, to and from their hunting 
grounds, towards the head-waters of the Kansas. 

On the 3d of October we reached the antelope range, and saw four or 
five of these animals scouring the boundless expanse, or ascending some 
favorable eminence to gaze upon us. Slight signs of buiTalo also appeared, 
and everything seemed to indicate the approach to a game country. 

Parting a short distance from the trail, a large sage rabbit bounded up 
before me, — ^the first of his species I ever saw. This animal is nearly 
three times the size of the common rabbit, and of a white color, slightfy 
tinged with grey. It derives its name from being found principally in coun- 
tries abounding with absinthe or wild sage. In the regions adjacent to the 
mountains, these animals occur more frequently, — and even amon^ the 
mountains, where their tails and ears are tipped with jetty black. Their 
fur is soft and fine,— equalling if not surpassing that of the Russia rabbit. 
Their flesh is also of a superior flavor, as I have had opportunities of 
testing. 

Towards night, three antelope appearing near the trail, our hunter nade 

* By a recent treaty with the Kansas Indians, our govemment has become 
of nearly the whole of this beautiful section. 



06 AlfTELOPE OF THE PRAIRIE. 

an nnsnccessfni attempt to approach them, which aflbrded me a fint U* 
Mnff of the nature and character of these animals. 

The antelope of the grand prairie difiers but little in size and sfaane 
from the common sheep, and is coated with long, brittle hair,-— of a md^ 
brown color, except at the tail and head, where it is short and white. The 
female is hornless, except an occasional blunt corneous excrescence, sooie 
two or three inches k>nff. protruding from the head. The male, however, 
is equipped with hook-^ped antlers, ebony colored, and six or eight inches 
in length, which he sheds annually in the months of November and De- 
cember. 

This is the fleetest inhabitant of the prairie. No horse can compett 
with it in speed. Quick of sight, keen of scent, and acute of ear, it 
seems ever on the alert at the approach of real or supposed danger, — now 
swiftly advancing towards the object of its alarm or curiosity, — ^then circling 
before you with me fleetness of the storm-wind, to mount some eminence far 
away beyond reach, and gaze in security. Then, again, ere you have 
time to catoh breath for admiration, it repeats its seui-cyration from an 
opposite direction, still nearer and swifter, till past^— as if indeed borne on 
the wings of lightning— and yet again surveys you in the distance. Now, 
running from point, to point it examines you upon all sides, as it cautiously 
passes round, — ^then, snuffing the breeze, it aeain calls to aid its fleetness 
of limb, and with the velocity, of thought is lost to view in the vast ex- 
panse. 

Possessed of an inordinate share of inquisitiveness, it not unfrequenth 
&lls a victim to its own curiosity. The hunter, turbaned with a red han<t> 
kerchief and half concealed bemnd some object, first raising, tlien depress- 
ing his head, then withdrawing it entirely from view, then again discuising 
it to the curious animal, is almost certam to allure his game within gun- 
shot 

I have seen numbers killed in this manner. In the spring season they 
appear more sensitive than at any other time, and are easily lured to their 
mte. 

With the exhibition of this strange propensity, I have time and a^un 
been minded of its more fully developed moral prototype in man. How 
frequently do we see persons around us who indulge their appetites and 
passions, as often for mere curiosity as fancied pleasure^ — ^venturing near- 
er and still nearer towards the objects that command their ^attention and 
lure them into tlie vortex of ruin, till, with sure and deadly aim, the sfaailB 
of the tempter pierce the waning vitals of morality, and plunge the vic- 
tims headlong into a yawning abyss, where they are lost to themselves, 
to society, and to the world — ^lost forever! 

Here, then, is furnished for us a moral: — ^Beware how ^ou indulge a 
vain curiosity that lures to evil ; — ^never parley with temptation. 

These animals are found from the Big ^ Blue to the mountains — in 
Oregon, California, Santa Fe, and N. W. Texas. Their flesh is tender 
and sweet,-— quite equal to venison, though seldom fat, owing, as is sup 
posed, to their almost incessant mobility. 

Near our night-camp I noticed fresh beaver ** cuttinfifs," some of whkb 
eoosisted of trees, six inches in diameter, levelled by uese sagacious ani* 
nais. 



PAWNEE BRATEBT. 91 

The vicinity disclosed frequent booldera of red and dark femginova 
sandstone, with a soil somewhat arenose, reclining npon a changeablt 
deposite of sand and gravel, sneceeded by a snbstratom of partiHsolored 
am fiiable sandstone. The valley of the Bine is bonlered by hilla of 
graceful slope, both green and beantifol. 

I here remarked for the first time the appearance of oocft, which hero* 
from becomes quite common, and proves the pest of many places adjacent 
to the mountains. 

The Blue is a deep, narrow stream, with a swift comnt, o?er a bed of 

Euvel and pebbles, and is fringed by groves of oak, cotton-wood, and wil- 
w. Its valley is between one and two miles in width, with a superficeoC 
variable fertility, but generally consisting of good arable land. 

This section of country is considers very daneerons in the summer 
and &11 months, on account of the strolling bands of Pawnees which infest 
it. The voyageur holds the latter in great dread, unless he chances to be 
accompanied by a sufficient force to bid defiance to their approach. A 
party, numerically weak and indifi&rently armed, meets with rou^ treat- 
ment at their hands while on the open prairies. Persons and propeitjr 
are rarely respected, and the ui^ortunate traveller is not only plundereo, 
but often whipt or murdered without mercy. 

This, however, may not be said of all — it is only the young warrioiii 
when beyond the restraint of their chiefs and seniors, who peip^rate such 
outrages ; though, to their praise be it said, instances of this kmd are quite 
seldom, at present, compared with former years. 

The courage of these Indians is held in little repute by mountaineen; 
and, that this opinion is not unfounded, the following incident will prove. It 
was related to me by an actor in the scene: 

A small party of whites on their cruise down the Phitte with a carso of 
furs, " ky by " to make meat, near the forks of that stream. Buffiib be- 
ing at some distance from camp, our adventurers were compelled to perforA 
the duties of pack-horses in conveying the proceeds of their hunting ex- 
cursions. One day, four of them left tor this object, and having proc^^ 
some six or eight miles, a war-party of Pawnees suddenly emerged from 
belund an eminence, directly fronting them. Alarmed at the unwelcome 
aj^Mirition, and imagining the whole country to be alive with Indians, they 
immediately ran, and were pursued towards camp. One of the number, a 
big, lazy fellow, and rather ^ green *' withal, soon became tired, and sung 
oat to lus companions : 

** Don't let's run so hst Blast me, if I can keep up !" 

** Come on, — come on !" cried they. ^ A thousand ' shaved heads ' are 
upon us, half frozen for hair !" 

"Pooh ! Ill bet five dollars there aint thirty !" 

** Done ! But, wholl count the bloody varmints ?" 

"Why, I'U do it, just for my own satisfaction." So saying, he wHeeled 
and advanced towards the Pawnees, as his wondering companions halted a 
little distance off, to learn the result of his fool-daring. 

Surprised at this strange movement, the enemy also came to a stand, 
aflbrding a fine opportunity to ascertain their number, which only amounted 
to nineteen! 



\ 



M PRAIRIES ON FIRE. 

Tve won !*' exclaimed our liero. " Let's charge, and give 'em the ver 
devil!" 

The word went for command, and llie four huntert> dashed boldly towards 
the terrified savages, who in turn Jled, with greater velocity than they hid 
called into exercise at any time during their advance, — illustrating the 
truth of the saying, "' tyrants are always cowards." Legs proved quite 
convenient articles for the Pawnee braves ! They were out of sight in a 
few minutes, and were very careful not to stop until they had left their 
pursuers far in the rear. 

A Pawnee with a defenceless enemy in his power, like some examples 

among the whites, is unrivalled in courage and daring ; but where there is 

resistance ofiered, and fighting to be done, he, as well as the Irishman's 

ehickens, *^ comes up missing!^* He is always bravest when furthest 

\^ from danger. 

Wo were careful to observe the strictest vigilance at night, to prevenl 
the loss of horses from lurking bands of Indians. The animals of the 
caravan were uniformly picketed in compact order, and sentinels, posted at 
suitable distances, continued to pace their rounds, from dark till daylight; 
while each of the company slept by his arms, in readiness at any moment 
to repel an attack. 

Having travelled for seven successive days, we made camp late in the 
afternoon at the head of the right fork of Blue. 

During the day we had noticed a dense smoke some distance in the 
rear, but, with the wind in an opposite direction, no uneasiness was felt op 
that account. The sentries were soon at their posts, and evervthing was 
snugly disposed of for the night. Those not on duty improved the oppor- 
tunity to gain respite from the fatigues of the day, and, in a brief interval, 
were snoring away at an admirable rate. 

The polar-star by its <^ pointers " had just told the hour of midnight, 
when th'ese hurried words rang through tlie camp : 

" Lave, ho ! Liive !* Prairies on &re ! Quick— catch up ! catch 
up!" 

This "tjirtling announcement instantly brought every man to his ieet;— 
and sue I) a scene as now met the eye ! How awful, and how grand ! The 
wind, new changed and freshened, to the right and rear, was tossing the 
flauiei cowards us, rapidly — ^lighting the heavens with their lurid glare, 
and transforming tlie darkness of night into a more than noon-day splen- 
dor! 

Here was, indeed, an ^^ ocean ofjlamei*^ fin: as the eye could reach- 
dancing with fiory wavelets in the wind, or rolling its burning surges, in 
mad tury, eager to lick up every vestige of vegetation or semblance of 
combustible that appeared in its way ! — now shooting its glowing missiles 
for, far ahead, like meteors athwart the sky, or towering aloft from the 
weeds and ^ali grass, describing most hideous and fantastic forms, tliat, 
moving with the wind, more resembled a cotillion of demons among their 
native flames than aught terrestial! — then driving whole sheets of the 
nging element into the withered herbage in front, like the advance scouts 

* " Lave " appeals to be a corruption of the Spanish word levar, to get up, oi 
•rouse, as from ueep. It is in cummon use among mountaineers. 



PLATTE RIVER AND ITS YICimTV. 00 

of an invading anny, swept onward its desolating conraet leaving in id 
track naught save a blackened waste of smoking ruins ! 

Altogether, it was a sublime spectacle, a stupendous scene, grand and 
imposing beyond description, and terrible in its beauty ! Commingled with 
sensations of wonder and admiration, it tended to impress the beholder with 
feelings of painful melancholy. The broad expanse, but a few moments 
since an-ayed in all the mourning grandeur of tadiuu^ autumn, was now a 
naked desert, and every vestige of loveliness in an instant snatched firom 
view! 

How sudden, how awful, how marked tlie chang? ! and yet, how mag- 
nificent in its career, though doleful its sequel ! 

We were speedily under way, witli as much earnrstness* of advance as 
tliat of righteous Lit, in his escape from burning Sodom.* For a while 
the pursuing enemy kept even pace, and threatened to overtake us, till, 
headed by the strong wind, which meanwhile had changed its course, it 
began to slacken its speed and abate its greediness. 

About sunrise we crossed the regular Pawnee trails, (leading to and from 
their hunting grounds, which bore the appearance of being much fre- 
quented,) and at 10 o'clock, A. M., reached the Platte river, having trav- 
elled a distance of thirty miles without halting. 

The mountain road strikes the 'above stream at lat 40^ 4V 06" north, 
long. 99^ 17' 47'' west from Greenwich, some twenty miles below the 
he^ of Grand Island. This island is densely woorled and broad, and extends 
for fifty or sixty miles in length. The river banks are very sparsely tim- 
bered, a deficiency we had occasion to remark during the remainder of our 
journey. 

The valley of tlie Platte at this place is six or seven miles wide, and the 
river itself between one and two miles from bank to bank. Its waters are 
very shallow, and are scattered over their broad bed in almost innumera- 
ble channels, nearly obscured by the naked sand-bars tliat bechequer its 
entire course through the grand prairie. Its peculiarity in this respect 

five birth to the name of Platte, (shallow,) which it received from the 
rench, and Chartre, (surface,) from the Mexicans, — the Indians, accord- 
ing to Washington Irving, calling it Nebraska,\ a term synonymous with 
that of the French and Americans, — however, I am ignorant in reference 
to the latter. 

* The great penl of our situation, and the pressing necessity of a hurried flight, 
may be readily inferred from the fact, that one waggon was freighted with a 
large quantity of gunpowder. None of us were quite so brave or presentpininded as 
■evenu Mexicans, in the employ of Messrs. Bent &. St. Vrain, on an occasion some- 
what similar. While ioumeying across the grand prairies, the powder-wugon acci* 
dentaUy caught fire, wnich was noticed immediately by the Mexican atten^its, who 
hurriedly ck^ped it upon all siden, to prevent the vehicle from being blown to pieces, 
while one of them proceeded deliberately to extinguish the flames ! Neither could 
we stand comparison with a lieutenant of the Mexican army, at Santa Fe, who, on 
opening a keg of powder, made use of a red-hot iron in lieu of an aucer, for that 
purpose. It 18 needless to say, a tremendous exfdosion followed. Sevenu of the by* 
Btanders were tdUed, but the lieutenant miraculously escaped. He soon alter receiv- 
ed a Captain's commission from the Commander-in-chief, in conaideratum of his 
ind(Hnitable courage ! 

tThe Sioux have bestowed the appellation of Duck river upon the Nortli Fork of 
Flatte. 



60 THEORY RELATTYE TO THE PRAIRIES. 

The bottom upon the south bonk is between three and fear miles broad, 
and of a light, deep, and rich soil, occasionally sandy, but covered with thick 
and lusty vegetation. Back from the valley, ranges of broken sand^iills 
mark the transition to the high arid prairies in the rear, where vesetation 
becomes more dwarfish and stinted in its growth, and is interming^d with 
ireqaent cacti. 

These immense plains are generally clad with a short, curly grass, (the 
buffido grass,) very fine and nutritious, and well adapted to the sustenance 
of the countless herds of buffiilo and other wild animals that feed upon it. 
Their soil is generally of a thin vegetable mould, upon a substratum of 
indurated sand and gravel. 

In many places it is quite sterOe, producing little other than sand-buns 
and a specimen of thin, coarse grass, that sadfy fail to conceal its forbidding 
surfJEice ; in others, it is but litQe better than a desert waste of sand-hills, 
or white sun-baked clay, so hard and impervious that neither herb nor grass 
can take root to grow upon it ; and in others, it presents a light superfice, 
both rich and productive, beclad with all that can beautify and adorn a 
wilderness of verdure. 

The springs and streams of water are ** few and fiir between," — an enl, 
however, slightly atoned for by the occasional pools formed in favoring de- 
pressions during the rainy season, which are retained in their places by the 
extreme hardness of the soil. Were it not for these it would be almost 
impossible, in many directions, to travel the vast prairies lying between 
the Arkansas and Missouri, from long. 22^ Z(y west from Vvashinston to 
tlie Rocky Mountains. That this section of country should ever become 
inhabited by civilized man, to any extent, except in the vicinity of laTse 
water-courses, is an idea too preposterous to oe entertained for a sioj^ 
moment. 

As the reader is now inducted to the grand prairie as it is, it may not be 
amiss to say something relative to this phenomenon, before dismissing the 
subject in hand. 

The steppes of Asia, the pamjfos of South America, and the prairies of 
the great West, so far as my information extends, are possessed of one 
general and uniform character. There is something deeply mysterious 
associated with them, that puzzles the philosopher and cosmogonist to ex- 
plain. Why is it neither timber nor shrubs, as a general thing, are found 
within their confines ? Why have not the same causes operated here 
which produced the stately foreste of other regions ? 

The above questions are often asked, and as often answered ; but never 
satisfactorily. 

Some respond by a reference to their frequent burnings,— others to 
some chemical defect in their soil,— others, to the disgeniality of their 
climate,—- others, to their infecund aridity^ — and yet, others, to the sup- 
position that some operation of nature or art has eflected the destruction 
of quondam forests, and reduced them to their present condition. 

Each of these answers, though, doubtless, partially true in many re* 
spects, fails to solve the problem before us. 

Here we have, in many places, almost measureless extente of fertile 
Boil, moist and abundantly watered, by rains, springs, and ever-flowisg 
■trcHBims, with all the desiderata for the producing of trees, — and what 



SOMETHING TO LAUGH AT. 01 

withliolds them ? Other sections of country, under less favorable circom- 
atances, are not wanting in this respect. 

Why is it ? Timber of every kind adapted to the zone and climate wilt 
grow as thriflilv when planted here, as elsewhere. The frontier toresis of 
our Western States have been observed for years past to make slow but 
constant encroachment npoo contiguoas prairies, from ail sides, whnre, as 
yet, they have a foothold ; — and why 7 Partly, because their enlargement 
18 not circumvented by those annual burnings that formerly devoured every 
tender shoot darin^r to raise its head above ground ; and, partly, tlirougu 
the (^ration of other causes, sure and gradual in their effect, which have 

eted the groves of c^her lands and taught their branches to wave in the 
ze. Doubtless the same causes would [nnoduce the same results, all 
over these vast regions, as elsewhere. 

But, why have they not 7 — ^why are the prairies timberless 7 Simply, 
because a sufficiency of time has not yet elapsed for the operation of tiiese 
causes, — ^timber has hitherto had no possible chance firar generation. The 
phenomeiion, if ri^itly viewed, « ill thus explain itself. Ueology points to 
the time when these vast solitudes were the bed of okl Ocean and the home 
of waves, — but, gradually emornng or suddenly elevated from the watery 
abyss, they now present some ot the more recent formations of dry land. 

Ilerbage and grass, being more easily propasated than trees, — sown as 
are their seeds by the birds and scattered by Uie winds of heaven, — in a 
brief interval, beswathed the new4)om earth with smiling green. Thus 
clothed with verdancy, they soon became the favorite pastures of the 
countless herds that thronged them. With game, appeared the red mm 
to hunt it, and with him tSd yearly conflagrations that now repel the in> 
trading woodlands and confirm tlie unbroken sway of solitude amid Iter 
fiu* extending domains. 

Here, then, we have spread before us the prairies as we find them, — the 
problem of their existence neods nu further solution. 

Oct. I2t1u Still continuing up the Platte by its south bank, we made 
camp at night near the head of Grand Island. During our progress we 
saw large quantities of w^ild geese and cranes in the river bottoms, that 
presented tempting marks for our vouftgeun. One of the latter, — a tall, 
raw-boned, hsdf-crazed, and 8elf<«onfiaent Missouri **' Ned,'*-*-good natured 
and inane, — sporting the familiar soubriquet of ** Bi^ Jim," — wishing to 
prove the truth of the Dogberry axiom, that ** some things may be done as 
well others," started to approach a large flock of sand-^ill cranes, parading 
half obscured in a plat of grass near the road side. 

The waiy birds, however, caught glimpse of the approaching Nimrod 
and flew. Still our hero advanced, crawling upon all-fours, to within sixt> 
cr seventy yards of their recent position, when, raising up, he espyed an 
object which his excited imagination portrayed a crane, iwd promptly yielded 
to it the contents of his rifle. 

Of course the obstinate creature remained in statu quo, 

Be-loading with all passible speed, he again fired ! But the second shoe 
pnwed futile as the first. 

Determined the next should count whether or no, he advanced still 
nearer, and had raised for his third discharge, before the naked truth burst 



62 BIG JIM AND THE ANTELOPE. 



. M«M*WH«MMMMHP 



Upon his astonished vision,— he had been shooting at a banch of dead mss I 
Shoaldering his rifle he now rejoined the caravan, and was received If the 




Hang 

" Reckon yon wanted a Ingger charge." 

" Strange you couldn't Imock it cold at that distance !" 

« May be your gun*s out of order?*' 

^ Yes. I'll bet a stewed crane of it Have you noticed the '^ sights" 

lately ?" 

<* Why, Jim, Really you've had bad luck ! What, within sixty yaids 
and not kill ? I can beat that, all dav !" 

« Ha, ha, Jim ! Shoot him grass !'' 

This rally was received, bv our hero, in good part, who joined ui the 
sport with as much gusto as though some one else were the victim. 

The day, however, was not permitted to pass without another display of 
the prowess of ^1^ Jim." 

A doe antelope, attracted by the strange appearance of the moving can* 
van, and impelled l^ its innate curiosity, had ventured to a tempting praz* 
imity. Mounted upon a fleet horse and supposing he could easuy ride 
down the antelope, our hero started in pursuit 

Intently surveying the passing scene, the agile animal permitted him to 
advance within a few yards of her before she took the alarm.. Now wis 
a novel race. .Away went antelope and away went Jim, in full chase. 
The former was soon far ahead, ana stopped to gaze upon her pursuer. 

Supposing she had become tired and was about to ^ield, our hero came 
dashing on, impetuously, under whip and spur, fully mtent upon her cap- 
ture. But, a^ain, away went antelope, ana away went Jim, whose steed, 
ambitious as its rider, and proud in its own fleetness, strained every nerve 
tor the crisis. Even the antelope seemed to have found a champion tD 
contest her unrivalled fuid universally acknowledged superiority, ^^th 
distended mouth and protruding tongue, panting in the excitement of fear, 
and foaming in the vehemency of eflbrt, she ^ned but slowly upon the 
bounding charger, as both swept over the praine almost with speed of the 
storm-wind ! 

Now, again, she stops to gaze upon her pursuer. By this time ail be- 
gan to fed an interest in the result of the strange race. The woid re- 
funded: 

** Go it, Jim ! you'll beat the beater, yet !" 

Once more, the antelope shoots from before both horse and rider, like 
the swift-winged arrow twanged from a giant^s bow ! 

A broad ravine intercepting her course was cleared at a bound, and left 
the flying animal far upon the other side. At a bound the steed akn 
cleared the barrier, but, in striking upon the opposite bank, it pini^ped 
headlong upon the yielding ground, tossing its rider fiur away in advance^ 
all safely sprawling in a sand heap. 

The luckless wight, on recovering, found his noble beast so sprained hf 
the M it could scarcely stand, and its every nerve vibrating with frightfol 
tremors. Of course here was the finale of the race, as both now ie». 
*umed to the caravan, — ^the recent rider, on foot, leading his jaded steedf«-« 



BIG JLM'S THIRD ATTEMPT AS HUNTER. «3 



^0lg0^0^0^^%^^^^^^^'\^%^^^'^^'^^^^^^'><^^>^'*^^^*^ .^x^>^^«*««>'^^ 



r* ^*^%^^ ^% 



the ridden slowly Iimpin|r behind, — presenting a marked contrast between 
the opening and closing scene. 

The ill-fated horse was too much disabled for further service during the 
jonmey. 

As our hero joined the company, the joke-loving wags again broke 
loose: 

" Well, Jim. I say, — ahem ! did you catch the tamal critter ?" 

" Pooh ! Why didn't you hold on, and not let her slide tlirough jonr 
fingers in that way !" 

** Why, man ! You wasn^t spry enough, when you jumped off your horse* 
or you might have caught her — just as easy !" 

** I'd like to know what you was diving arter in that sand-bauk !— Iho 
antelope wasn't there !" 

** Oh, Jim ! Shoot him grass, kill horse. Me look next time he run 
antelope." 

The passive recipient of these sallies had little peace from hence* 
forth, and soon began to wish he had never seen an antelope or heard ot a 
Gnne. 



CHAPTER V. 

Dewrted camp. — ^Big Jim's tliird attempt as a hunter. — Bufi&lo and other particu- 
lars. — Big Jim lying guard. — Butchering. — Strange selections. — Extraordinary 
eating, and excellence of buflalo meat..— Brady's Island. — The murderer's (ate.~- 
Substitute for wood. — A storm.— Game m camp.— Strange infatuation. — Tenacity 
of bufi&lo to life, and how to hunt them.—Croas S. Fork of Platte. — Big Jim's 
Isnrth adventure. 

Nbar camp was the .site recently occupied by the Pawnee village, 
whose occupants had evidently deserted it with the utmost precipitancy, 
leaving lodse-skins, mortars, bowls, pans, and a variety of other articles 
strown conmsedly upon all sides. They had doubtless become alarmed at 
the approach of some real or supposecf enemy, and consulted their own 
safety m flight 

Having started early the next day, our hunter soon l»t)ught in twt fine 
aatelqie, the sight of which again raised the ambition of Big Jim, who would 
fiun do deeds of equal wonder ; and he accordingly strolled off into the 
hills with that intent After shooting at several of the wary animals 
without success, he began to get tir^ of the sport, and concluding the 
** poverty-stricken" creatures not worth the powder and lead, set his &ce 
fat the caravan 

Plodding leisurely along, he espied a prairie snake, and, o'eijoyed at 
the thought of counting a ** coup, " gathered his rifle by the small, and 
btonght it down with such force, he not only killed the snake, but broke 
his gun-stock short off at the breech. With the pieces, one in each hand, 
.be made his appearance before his comrades, who hailed him : 



64 LYING GUARD. 

« Hallo, Jim. What'a that you've killed t" 

<* Gun broke. Why, you must have overloaded it !" 

<* Whenll you go hunting ae^ain 7— 'case I want to go too !*' 

** Poor Jim ! Shoot grass, kill horse, In^ak gun ! Wat in de wor. 
does him mean !" 

'< Never mind, Jim. Don't be skeered at these fellows. It takes yoa 
to play the devil and break things !" 

Towards niffht, several bufialo bulls having made their appearance, our 
hunter, mounting a horse, started for the chase, and in a brief interval, re- 
turned laden wiUi a supply of meat. Camp had already been struck, and 
preparations for the new item of fiwe were under speedy headway. 

The beef proved miserably poor ; but when cooked, indiJSerent as it was, 
I imamned it the best I had ever tasted. So keen was my reikh, it 
seemed impossible to get enough. Each of us devoured an enoxmooB 

Quantity for supper,— and not content with that, several forsook their beds 
uring the night to renew the feast,— as though they had been actually 
^starving for a month. 

The greediness of the *' greenhorn?," was the prolific source of amin»- 
ment to our voyageurs, who made the ni^ht-air resound with laughter at 
the avidity with wliich the unsophisticated ones '' walked into the a^ctioea 
of the old bull," as they expressed it. " Keep ou your belts till we get 
among cows," said they, ^then let out a notch or two, and take a&U 
meal." 

It was equally amusing to me, and rather disgusting withal, to see the 
" old birds," as they called themselves, dispose of the only liver brought ui 
camp. Instead of boiling, frying, or roasting it, ihey laid hold of it nw, 
and, sopping it mouthful by mouUiful in gaU, swallowed it with surprising 
gusto. 

This strange proceeding was at first altogether incomprehensible, but, 
ere the reader shall have followed me through all my adventures in the 
wilds of the great West, he will find me to have obtained a full knowledge 
of its several merits. 

The beef of the male bufi&lo at tliis season of the year, is poorer tiian 
at any other. From April till the finst of June, it attains its prime, in 
point of excellence. In July and August, these animals prosecute their 
knight-errantic campaign, and, between running, fighting and gallantly, 
find little time to graze, finally emerging from the contested field, with 
hides well gored, and scarcely flesh enough upon their bones to make a 
decent shadow. 

It is nowise marvellous, then, that our lavish appropriation of bnS- 
meat at this time, when it is unprecedentedly tough, strong-tasted, aad 
poor, should excite the mirth of our better-informed beholders. 

The night was a cold one, and claimed for it Big Jim as second ffOBtiiA, 
When called for "relieve," with a borrowed gun, he commenoMU his 
rounds, — but the cold soon drove him to the camp-fire. 

Here, weariness and the somnific efi^ts of a generous heat, speedKlf 
found him stretched at full length towards the fire, snoring away at a flomif 
*ate, the subject of their combined influence 



SLAITGHTER OF BUFFALO. W 

The gaard time had already expired, and his partner on dntj, perceiving 
the pleasant situation of the indomitable Jim, called the next ** relieve, 
and retired. 

These paced their rounds, and the foorth guard succeeded, but still omr 
hero occupied the same place in which he had lain his ^tour.*' The 
sentinels were about to take their postn, as a loud sharp voice resounded 
through camp. 
«Quit,there! What d'ye mean ?•• ' 

Hastening to the spot from which the cry proceeded, who should be 
Men bat Big Jim, in great agony, rubbing hie foot with mo^t pitiable 
grimace: 

His slumbers had been disturbed by a falling log, of the camp>fire, which 
had planted its growing weight full against one of his feet, — becrisping 
the sole of his shoe and severely scorching its tenant, before awakening 
hifli. Dreaming some one had hold of his foot, and started by a sudden 
acuteness of pam, he exclaimed as above quoted. 

The sentinels laughed at his mishap, and turning to pace their rounds, 
drawled out: 

** What £ye mean 7 Sure enough, what d'ye mean ! Shoot grass, 
kill horse, break ffun, lay guards bum shoe, and scorch foot ; — all in two 
days and two nights ! Foor devil, — ^why ye no bom wid better luck !" 

With the morning, the subject of bis recent adventures called forth fresh 
scintillations of waggish wit, — while the unrivalled capacity of our hero, 
as a gormandizer, gave cue to the cuts that followed : 

** Well, my head for a fbot4iall, if that aint the greatest idea vet 
What ! — roast footj basted wilh feodier,— imd his own at that ! Sucn a 
meal none but Jim would ever have thought of !" 
*' Why, man ! What put you in the notion of that dish ?" 
** Strange, indeed, if you can't find the wherewith to stuff your devO, 
without cooking your feet ! Souse, to be sure ! Here, you can take ^y 
hat!" 

The luckless wight had now enough to encage his attention during the 
remainder of the journey, and began to wish he had never seen a moun- 
tam company, or left his sweet home in Missouri to cross the great prairies 
with such a crowd, — but all to no purpose ; he was too late to retrace his 
steps alone. 

Oct* IZth, Starting at early day, we travelled till about 11 o'clock, 
A. M., and halted for breakfast. The teams were scarcely turned to graze, 
when a dense band of boffiilo cows n^ade their appearance, from the back 
prairie, wending their way towards the- river. 

Expectation was on tip-toe, and all appetites doubly sharpened for an 
anticipated feast, as our hunter and his assistant started to intercept the 
witless animals at the river bank. 

Tbe two placed themselves in a chosen position and awaited the heavily 
moving throng, which soon advanced to within shooting distance. The 
sharp crack of a rifle now stopped their headway, and caused ttiem to re^ 
ceil a few paces, leaving one ot their number struggling in death. An 
other discharge followed, and the aflrighted herd were seen flying from 
their c<Miceal^ enemy, with ail the energy that imiate dread of danger and 

6* 



06 EXTRAOBDr(AST EATDia 

deadi lent to their leadj feet^ — but not mtfl another Ticdm had dank tiiB 
•od wHli the anfloofffat libation of its heajt's Uood. 

It pained me, as I came up, to witne» the noble beasts as thej lay ex- 
tended upon the goie-djed grmmd. Bnt the preaeai was no time ftr 
reffret ; we were to ieed npm their careasea. 

The process of bntchenng^ was a new derdopement of that most vse- 
fol science. The carcase was fint tonied upon the beflj, and biaced to a 
position by its distended legs. The operator then commenced his labon by 
gathering the long hair of the ** Aosi," and severing a piece ohliqndy at 
the junction of tl^ neck and shoolders^ — then parting the hide finom neck 
to rump, a few panes of his jeady knife laid hue the sides^ — next paring 
away the loose skin and ineparing a hold, with cme hand he polted the 
shoulder towards him and with the other severed it from the body ;— <iat- 
ting aslant the upriffbts of the spina darn and ''hump ribs," along the late- 
ral to the curve, and parting the " fleece " from the tough flesh at that point 
be deposited it upon a clean grass-spoL 

The same process being aescribed upon the opposite side, the carcase 
was then slightly inclined, and, by aid ot the leg-bone bisected at tiie knee- 
joint, the 'Miump-ribs " were parted from the vertebne; after which, pass- 
ing his knife aside the ninth rib and around the ends at the midrifl^ he laid 
hold of the dissevered side, and, with two or three well directed jerks, re- 
moved it to be laid upon his choicely assorted pile ; a few other brief minu- 
ti» then completed the task. 

Meanwhile, divers of the company had joined the butoher, and, while 
some were greedily feeding upon liver and gall, others helped themselves 
to marrow-bones, ^boudinM,^ and intestinum meduioi, (choice selecticms 
with mountaineers,) and others, laden w^ith rich spoils, hastened their le- 
tum to commence the more agreeable task of cooking and eating. 

The remaining animal was butohered in a trice, and select portions of 
each wore then placed upon a pack-horse and conveyed to the wag^gons. 

The assortment was, indeed, a splendid one. The ^ depouiUe (fleece- 
fat) was full' two inches thick upon the animal's back, and the other dainties 
were enough to charm the eyes and excite the voracity of an epicure. 

The camp-fires soon presented a busy and amusing spectacle. Each 
one was ornamented with delicious roasts, en appolas, on sticks planted 
aslope around it, attentivelv watched by the longing voyageurs^ who await- 
ed tiie slow process of cooking. Some were seen with tMn slices from the 
lanlor, barely heated through by the agency of a few coals, retreating from 
the admiring throng to ei^ov soio their hali-cooked morsels, — others, paring 
oiT bit by bit from the fresh-turned hissing roasts, while tiieir opposite re- 
ceived the finishinff operation of the fire, — and others, tossing their everted 
biAuiifii into the flames, and in a few seconds withdrawing for the repast, 
each soiling^ his ample share, bemouthed the end in quick succession to 
iovor tlic dkoson esculent, which, while yielding to the eager teeth, coursed 
uiiniaturo rivulets of oily exuberance from the extremities of the active 
orifioc, Uniaubing both face and chin, and leaving its delighted eater in afl 
llie ghms ^* grease ! 

ii^viTy man had now become his own cook, and, not to be backward, I 
whmd in with the overture. 

i^aiiig a frying-pan replete with tempting levies from the ** floaoo^" I 



• • • • 

• • a • 

• • • 

• • • 



>• • • 



• • * • 

• • • • 



,•• 



» •• 



« •• • 
• a • •• • 

:• — • 



BRADY'S ISLAND. 69 

^^mm^^ ■ ■ %■ - -- *-i i 'umru-Ln-n-n-n_ru-u-Lr i . 1 — i -* - - u jt i i -LrL- i r i r i - - ii rir-u-M-u-u- i ~»*ri » " i - B ' ^"-^i -^^^r^^^^^^nHnrt^ff^^^^^l^nflfc 



twice Bulijected it to its duty, and as often its deliciooB conleiiti found 
pie store^ase ; and even yet my longing appetite seemed loth to ciy 
"Jwld, enough!" 

The agre«able odor exhaled from the drippings of the frying flesh, coo* 
tained in the pan, invited the taste, — a temptation claiming me for its sub- 
ject Catchiig up the vessel, a testing sip made way for the whole of its 
contents, at a single draught^ — ^full six gills ! Strange as it may seem, I 
did not experience the least unpleasant feeling as the result of my extraoiv 
dinary polktioik 

The stomach never rebels acainst bnflalo-fat. Persons, subsisting en- 
tirely upon the flesh of these ^mmaU^ prefer an assortment of at least one 
third solid depouille. 

The voyageur is never more satisfied than when he has a good supply 
of bufliio-beef at his command. It is then his greasy visaee bespeaks 
contont, and his jocund voice and merry laugh evince the deepTelt pleasure 
and gratification that reign within. 

Talk not to him of tl^ delicacies of civilized life,*-of pies, puddingii 
«>aps, fricasees, roast-beef, pound-cake, and desert, — he cares for none of 
dicHc things, and Mrill laugh at your verdancy! 

fie knows his own preference, and will tell you your boasted excellencies 
are not to be compared with it If you object to the sameness of his sim- 
ple fare, he will recount the several varieties of its parts, and descant 
upon each of their peculiar merits. He will illustrate the numerous and 
dissimilar modes of so preparing them, that they cannot fail to excite bv 
their presence and appease by their taste the appetite of the most &sti- 
dioua. And then, in point of hudtk, there is nothmg equal to buffido-meat 
It, alone, will .cure dyspepsy, prevent consumption, amend a broken consti- 
tution, put flesh upon uie bones of a tkekUm^ and restore a dead man agam 
to life ! — if you will give credence to one half of the manifold virtues ha 
carefully names in your hearing. 

Oct. 14/^ We were early en roule^ and made some twenty miles. 
Onr hunter, during the (ky, rejoined the caravan, laden with the best pei^ 
tions of three other fat cows, to add to the fund of life and good humor en- 
joyed by each. 

Late in the afternoon, we made camp opposite a heavily wooded island, 
called Brady's Island, in memory of a man, so named, who was murdered 
upon it by his companion some eight years aga 

The two were connected with a beat, laden with furs, on its passage to 
the States. They had frequently quarrelled, and were generally unon 
otherwise bad terms. On the day of the fatal occurrence, they were left 
alone in camp by the rest^of the boat's crew, who went in quest of 
bufi^a At their return, Brady was found lying in his Uood, — Skill- 
ed, as his companion affirmed, by the accidental discharge of his own 
rifle. 

The tale was received quite doubtingly, and its listeners were only de- 
terred from the execution of summary vengeance upon the murderer by 
thought of the bare possibility of its truth. 

The body of the imfortunate man was buried near the spot^-— but being 
rahsequenuy disinterred 1^ tiie wolves, his bones were left to bleach ana 



70 THE MUR])EHER*S FATE. 

moulder in the sun and rains of heaven. Some of them were lyin^ scat* 
tered near by, upon onr arrival, which were collected by the sympauiizing 
voyageurSf who bestowed upon them those rites of sepulture they haa 
been so lonff and cruelly denied. 

The reader will naturally enquire, what became of the supposed mur- 
derer ? His was a fearful retribution,— a mournful tale of sufiering, worse 
than death, till death itself in pity came to his relief. 

Soon after the melancholy mcident previously related, the shallowness 
of the Platte river compelled the company to abandon their boat, and make 
the best of their way to the States on foot, — a distance of two hundred and 
fifty miles to the nearest inhabitants, either Indian or white. 

Their provisions running short, and no game at hand, a separation was 
had about midway of their journey, and each one hurried to its termination 
as rapidly as possible. The murderer, being but an indi^rent walker, was 
soon left far in the rear. 

His comrades, on their arrival at the Pawnee viUaee, sent two Indians 
to bring him in, and continued their course to Council Bluffi. 

Notmng further was known of the subject of our sketch, till some eight 
or nine days subsequent, when a small party of engages in the employ of 
the American Fur Company ,^n passing the Pawnee village, were met by 
the head-chief, who requested them to visit a white man lying sick at his 
lodge. 

They went He was the murderer, at the point of death. His story 
was briefly told. 

The night succeeding the departure of his companions, in an attempt to 
light a fire with his pistol, to disperse by its smoke the myriads of mns- 
quetoes that swarmed around and nearly devoured him, an unknown charge 
it contained was lodged in his thigh-bone— severing it to a tliousand pieces. 
In this condition he lay helpless. To walk was impossible ; — ^he could 
Scarcely move, far less dress his wounds in a proper manner. He man- 
aged, however, to affix a piece of red flannel to an upright stick, to tell the 
transient traveller the site of his supposed last resting place, then, crawl- 
ing with difficulty to the rivernside, he remained six (Uiys and nights—tor- 
mented by musquitoes, reduced by pain, and wasted by continu^ hunger, 
till scarcely the wreck uf manhood was left him. 

It was tnen he lonced for death to terminate his agony. Still he could 
not endure the thoughts of dying. 

Early in the morning of the seventh day, his ear caught the indistinct 
murmur of sounds. Were they human voices ? — No, he must be dream- 
iag. He hears them again. It is no dream ; — they are human voices ! 

They approach. Is it to his assistance ? 

O'erjoyed he beholds two Pawnees bending over him, with compas^on 
pictured expressively upon their countenances. They gave him meat^ — 
they dressed his wounds, and did everything in their power to alleviate his 
misery. 

Oh, say not there is no pity in the bosom of the red man! 

Having constructed a rude litter of poles, and using their own robes for 
his bed, uey carefully conveyed him upon their shoulders to the phice he 
yet occupied. 

But the care of sympathizing attendants failed to atone for previous neg 



GAME IN CAMP. 71 

lect Mortification had already taken place, and death claimed him for a 
victim. He expired in the presence of those whom the good chief had 
called to his hed-side; — but, before his tongue refused to speak, he con- 
fessed the murder cf Brady, and owned the justice of his punishment in 
all the untold miseries he had been compeUed to endure. 
** Vengeance is miney and I will sefat it, saith the Loid!" 

On resuming our journey the road gradually bore towards the hills upon 
the left, (which presented an outline of conical eminences, rising, as the 
traveller advances, to an elevation of four or five hundred feet,) and finally 
crossed them at the point of an angle formed near the confluence of the 
two great forks of the Platte, upon the east side ; from thence, descending 
to the opposite bottom, we reached a timberless spring and made camp 
loon after nightfall. 

The lack of wood at this place was readily met by the great abun- 
dance of bois de vache, (bufyo-chipsj the common snb^tute of the 
prairies ; and, in a brief interval, tlie camp-fires were merrily blazing, with 
all the appliances of cookery about them. 

Early the next morning, our hunter rejoined the caravan, bringing with 
him the spoils of two more cows« He had passed the night upon the 
prairie alone, without coat or blanket, or anything to screen him from the 
bleak autumn winds, that swept over the naked pluns, dancing their dirges 
to the dying year. 

The sky gave evidence of an approaching storm, and we hastily started 
ia quest of some more sheltered spot in which to weather it A few miles 
broufi^ht U8 to the river, and, availing ourselves of a small supply of drift 
wood, we made halt. 

The combustibles the vicinity a£&rded were soon collected, and the camp- 
fires imparted their generous warmth despite the falling rain. Nor were 
they permitted to remain long unembellished by the numerous kettles, 
frying-pans, and roasting-sticks at command. 

I here enjoyed full test of some of the many varieties of mountain fare 
hitherto so freely enlarged upon by oar voyageurs, — which, as they now 
asserted, would make a man ^'shed rain like an otter, and stand cold like a 

Eolar bear !"— -quaintly adding, '* if he could always live upon such ' didins,' 
e need never die!" 

I must in justice confess that the real merits of our present ^ bill of 
&re," by far exceeded my previous expectations. 

The rain continued till near night ; but little did we care. The choicest 
the prairie afiS)rded, was now before us, and, rain or shine, we were con- 
tented. Sound in health and buoyant in spirits, we fully enjoyed ourselves, 
desmte the frowning elements. 

« A little before sundown, the rain subsided into a thick fog, and an old 
bull, in the consequent obscurity, straggled close upon camp. 

The abrupt passage of a rifle-ball through his lights, was his €iBi feeling 
sense of the presence of danger. The aflrighted customer then retreated 
a few steps, and, fedling, surrendered himself to the resistless power of 
Cold lead. 

A large band of cows also made their appearance, in the same manner, 
and our hunter struck out to wayky them. 



72 STRVNSK INFVTTIATIOX. 

Permitting the unwitting animals t«) advance within good shooting di- 
tance, a discharge from his rillo brought down one of their number. Ti. 
band then recoiled slightly ; but, snutiing the odor of blood, they returned 
immediately to their prostrate companion. 

This was enough,— a charm now riveted them to the spot, — a strange 
infiELtuation had seized upon them. They becfan by spuming the ground 
with their feet« — then, bellowing, gored the falten beast, as if lorcing her to 
rise, — then, rolling upon the mss, in demonstrative svmpathy, — and, now 
that she had ceased to struggle and lay yet quivering m death, thev licke 
her bleeding wounds and seemed to exercise a kind of mournful rivali} 
in the bestowment of their testimonials of afRsction. 

She is encircled by her companions. An eflbrt to approach from without 
is resisted by those within. A fight ensues, and all becomes confusion. 
Each turns against her neighbor, and continues the strife till the space 
around the carcase is again vacated ; whereupon a general rush once more 
centers to the spot, and all unite to react the former scene. 

In this manner they persisted in their frenzied devotion to the fikUen one^ 
as if determined to restore her to life and action, or perish hy her side. 

Meanwhile the hunter's rifle had been busily employed. But they heeded 
it not Four more of their number lay gapping in death upon the en* 
sanguined ground; and still they seem^ no more disposed to leave 
the scene of slaughter than at first Sixteen successive shots were fired, 
each bearing blocxi, wounds and death, and yet the spell was no nearer 
broken. 

It was a spectacle vested with melancholy animation. The pawing, 
goring, hollowing, licking of wounds, and struggles of rival afliection, re- 
mained the same, with no visible abatement of their vehemency. 

The sun had set, and the sable hue of twilight empalled the blood-dank 
slaughter-ground. The death-dealing rifle had ceased its sharp crack, and 
the gore-scenting wolves, half starve and eager for their supposed prey, 
came flocking upon every side, mmgling their wobegone howlings with 
the piteous moans of tlie spell-bound heni, and the loud whistlings of the 
prairie winds, — and yet, tliey lingered. 

At last the impatient hunter advanced. More aflKghted at the presence 
of man than the companionship of death, they now gave way, and reluc- 
tantly lett the field to him, who nad so unfeelingly occasioned their burthen 
of mourning and woe ; — still, ever and anon stopping to gaze, as if longing 
to return and die with those they loved ! 

•All hands were now summoned to aid at the work of butchery ; but the 
iast-enshroudiog dai^ness soon drove us back to camp, leaving the task 
not half completed. 

Our withdrawal from the premises was the signal for possession by the 
eager wolves, whose ceaseless yelping^ the fivelong night, made the gloomy 
interval doubly dismal. By morning, nothing but bones and thick pieces 
of skin marked t^ie scene of their recent reveUings ! 

Thus early, I had learned, that to approach buffido with success, the hunter 
ahould carefully maintain the leeward, such being their remarkable sensi- 
tiveoess, they will sooner flee from the smell man the sight of a man. 
'Hieir sense of smell, with the wind, in fact, far exceeds their scope d 



BIG JIM'S FOURTH ADYENTURE. 73 



' ^»^»^»^^>^^#^^»^>^^^^^^*»^^^^i^>^^^"i^ ■ 



fiikm. It is so extremely acute, that evea the fresh footsteps of a man. 
crossiiifi; their path, are to them a sore cause of alarm and flight 

Of aS the diversities of same indigenous to the mountains and prairie* 
of the great West, with the exception, perhaps, of the grizzly bear, no 
animaJ is more tenacious of life than the buf&!o. To 6h(x>t it in the head« 
is an inane effort. No rifle can prcject a ball with sufficient force to per* 
forate the thick hair and hide to its brain, through the double scull-booe 
that protects it. A paunch shot is equally vain. The only sure points for 
the marksman are, the heart, lights, kidneys, or vertebrs ; and even then 
the unyielding victim not unfrequently escapes. 

Buflalo, wounded in the skirts of the lights, have been known to live for 
several days afterwards. 1 have witness^ their escape, even alter the re- 
ception of fifteen buUet-wonnds, and most of them at such points as would 
have proved fatal to almost any other animal. 

In the summer of '43, 1 myself killed one of them, that had been shot 
through the pussy surface at the bull of thr heart, apparently four or five 
days previous, which doubtless would have recovered had it remained nn* 
molested. ^ 

A gun, suitable for kiilins this kind of game, should never carry to ex- 
ceed forty bal^s to the pound — a lesser bore would be almost entirely use- 
less. The distance generally required for a shot, the smallness of the 
ball, its liability to variation from tJie wind, with its failure to " hold up " 
and retain its force, contribute to render the use of such a piece little else / 
than idle waste of ammunition. 

OcU nth. The sun arose bright and clear, and with its first appearance 
the caravan was in motion. Proceeding up the South Fork some ten miles 
we halted for breakfast, and made arrangements for fordins the stream. 

Near us lay the carcase of one of the cows wounded on the previovs 
evening, and as yet scarcely dead. She had travelled thus far after being 
shot in the lights. 

Our crossing was effected with little difficulty, but occupied till late ui 
the afternoon. The river was full a mile wide and very shallow, with a 
soft sandy bed, requiring the strength of all the united teams to each wag- 
gon. The day proved cold, and ti^ water was like an application of ice to 
the naked skin. Our teamsters, who were compelled to cross and recross-, 
some dozen times, felt in not the best humor, and were better pleased than 
any one else at tlie termination of their unpleasant task. 

Having safely gained the opposite bank, we travelled up the river &w 
or six miles, and ^ted for the night. 

During our course the bottoms upon either side presented one dense, 
interminable band of buflalo, far as the eye could reach. The whole prairie 
pictured a living mass, moved by impulsive dread, as the breeze heralded 
our approach, and the countless multitude made way before and on eitliei 
hand. 

Ever and anon, an old bull would linger, as if to intimidate, and not usf 
frequently venture within gun-shot. One lellow, in particular, passed side- 
long, ibr a mile or more, stopping at intervals to gaze upon us, shaking him 
shaggy bead in defiance, as much as to say, " you dare not come near !** 

lug Jim saw this, and his pride was wounded. The bull, in his cpinioOr 

7 



74 RARE POUTENESa 

had challenged the whole party, and there was no one stout-hearted enoofh 
to accept it 

Here was a chance for a fall display of his bravery and skill. Evet 
since we had reached the buffiilo range, his proud spirit had yearned to be- 
come the death of some one of these terrible monsters, that he miglit relate 
the deed of perilous exploit to wondering posterity, and incite the rismg 
generation to emulate lus noble achievement. 

But, alas, for the fadeless laurels he might otherwise have won, in an 
evil hour his rifle had been sacrificed for the extermination of a huge, 
venomous serpent. He did the deed at one fell blow ; — brave, but unfortu- 
nate ! Yet he had one consolation amid his troubles, — no victory is ever 
gained without some loss to the conquerors. 

Still, he needed his ^un, for without it how was he to avenge the foul in- 
sult the savage beast of the prairie was even now hurling in the very face of 
the shrinking crowd ? Something must be done. -^ 

With these cogitations, an idea struck him, — he could borrow a rifle ; 
80, advancing to a comrade, he exclaimed : 

** Do lend me your rifle, one minute !" 

" Yes, Jim," was the ready reply. " But see you don't break it over the 
first paltry little snake you come across !" 

" That s a lie. 'Twas a big rattle-snake I broke mine over. 'Twasnt 
a paltry little snake !" 

Thus, vindicating his assaulted reputation, he took the gun and hastened 
to prostrate the impudent barbarian inviting attack. 

Jim looked at the bull, and the bull looked at Jim, — shaking his head, and 
throwing the loose sand from beneath him high into the air with his ieet, 
and goring the ground with his horns of burnished ebony. If the creature 
had looked terrible before, he now looked fourfold more so, in Jim's estima- 
tiotL 

Thinking caution the parent of safety, our hero was unwilling to venture 
further, and so, prostrating himself at full len^h behind a clustre of 
abrinthe, (sage^) he planted his battery, having his high-crowned hat for a 
rest, and blazed away at tlie bull's head. 

The hardened wretch stood the shot without flinching. Looking for m, 
moment at the spot from whence the strange salute had proceed^, and 
again shaking his head and snorting with scorn, he wheeled and slowly 
trotted ofl*. 

Eager to get a second trial to finish the work so nobly begun, our hero 
commenced pursuit. Seeing him advancing, the bull thought it time to 
show his heels, and in a few minutes was lost in thoidistance. 

The courageous Nimrod now, for the first time, bethought him of hia 
hat, which, in the ardor of his bold charge, he had left at Sie spot chosen 
as his stand to hurl death and destruction to the naughty bull. He 
hastened to regain it — but no hat could be found ; — ^the winds had borne it 
fiur away over the prairie, to be wome out in search of a wearer, and tbo 
unlucky bravoy hatless, rejoined the caravan. 

Here the truth at once flashed upon the minds of the waggish clique, 
that had hitherto proved his sore annoyance, and they began anew : 

** Now that beats mc, clear out ! liow came you to give the bull your 
hat and leave yourself bare-headed ? That's another wrinklo !" 



SCENERY AT ASH CREEK. 76 

" It's no such., thing," said Jim. •* The wind took it away ; tirf it'f 
none of your business neither. I paid for UT^ 

*'True. But what did the wind want with yonr hat? Sure, if it 
needed a foot-baU, to toss over the prairies, it woulci have taken your head, 
the lighusl of the two!" 

^ lu)u're a fool !" retorted Jim, indignantly. 

** There, now. That's the time yon cotcht it, my boy. Wliy, fellow, 
Mr. Jeems took off his hat, out of pure/io/iteness,— to winthe good opinion 
of the bull. He were right Didn't you see how the gentleman-cow 
howed and scraped in turn. Why, he tkroto'd the dirt dean over his Itadt^ 
not to be outdone in good breedmg ! Ah, but the pesky wind ! While 
Mr. Jeems were showing his brotten up, what had it to do, but to snaU^ 
his hat and run off with it ! Mr. Jeems are no fool ! and the feller what 
says he am, — ^I want yon all to understand me ; Mr. Jeems have been 
most shamefully abused and misused, and I can whip the chaps what's 
done it— provided they'll let me ; — I say, tlien, I want you all to understand 
me !) Mr. Jeems are no fool, and the man what says he am— is,— (I can't 
think of words bad enough,}— is — is, as riear the mark as though he'd 
drove centred* 

** Aye. Jim's right. You are all a pack of dongh-4ieads to make fun 
of him in the way you do. Suppose you'd be struck comical ! Then 
what'd ye think of yourselves !" 

** Poor Jim. Shoot mss, kill horse, break gun, bum shoe, scorch foot, 
and eo bare-headed ! Wat him mean ?" 

^ 1 say, Jim. When 're going a hunting agam ?— 'case I want to go 
*long too!" 



CHAPTER VL 



▲ah Creek. — Pawnee and Sioux batde-groond. — ^Bread-root— The Eagle's Neit— 
Mad wolf, — Number and variety of prairie wolves, — their tagacity.^Mad bulL— 
Making and curing meat — Big Jim still unfi>rtooate. — ^Johnson's creek. — McFar- 
lan's Castle. — DeceptivenoM of distances. — ^Express from the Fort— Brave Bear. — 
Bun Tail.— Talk with the Indians.— Speech of Marto-cogenriine.— Reply.— Tah- 
tungah-sana's address. 

Oct \%tlu Bearivo to tlie right, over a hi^h undulating prairie, we 
struck the North Fork of the Platte, after a dnve of about twelve miles, 
and continuing up its left bank a short distance, camped for the night at 
the mouth of Ash Creek. 

The stream at this place is a broad bed of sand, entirely diy, except in 
the spring months. Higher up, however, it a£R>rds a generous supply of 
pure running water, sustained by the numerous feeders that foice their 
way into it, nom the hi^h grounds dividing the two rivers. « 

The valley is of variable width, and well timbered with beautiful ash 
groves, from which, the creek derives its name. Here are also found seri^ 
nd varieties of wildf fruit indigenous to the mountains. As a whole* it 



W BREAD-ROOT.— THE EAGLE'S NEST 



lMMAMMtfMWMWM^Mtf«#W««MW«^W^^#^^^^^^^M«^^i ^ . 



presents to the eye a pretty flower-garden, walled in l>y huge piles of 
argillaceous rock, and watered by murmuring streamlet whoee banks are 
ornamented wiUi shade trees and shubbery. 
^ Near camp had been the scene of a fierce and bloody battle between the 
Pawnees and Sioux, in the winter of 1835. The afiray commenced earlj 
in the morning, and continued till near night. A trader, who was present 
with the Sioux, on the occasion, describes it as having been remarkably 
close. Every inch of ground was disputed — now the Pawnees advanciog 
upon the retreating Sioux ; and now the Sioux, while the Pawnees gave 
way ; but, returning to the charge with redoubled fury, the former once 
more recoiled. The arrows flew in full showers, — ^the bullets whistled the 
death-song of many a warrior, — ^the yells of combating savages filled the 
air, and drowned the lesser din of arms. 

At length arrows and balls were exhausted upon both sides, — ^but still 
the battle raged fiercer than before. 

War-club, tomahawk and butcher-knife were bahdied with terrific force, 
as the hostile parties engaged hand to hand, and the clash of resounding 
blows, commingling with tne clamor of unearthly voices which rent the 
▼ery heavens, seemed more to prefigure the contest of tiends tlian aught 
else. 

Finally the Pawnees abandoned tlie field to their victorious enemies, 
leaving sixty of their warriors upon the ensanguined battle-ground. Bat 
the Sioux had paid dearly for their advantage ; — forty-five of their bravest 
men lay mingled with the slain. The defeated party were pursued gbIj a 
short distance, and then permitted to return without further molestation to 
their village, at the Forks of the Platte. 

This disaster so completely disheartened the Pawness, they immediately 
abandoned their station and moved down the river some four hundred 
miles, — nor have they again ventured so high up, unless in strong wa^ 
parties. 

About the same time the village on Republican fork of Kansas was also 
. abandoned, and its inhabitants united with the Loups. 

The evidences of this cruel death-harvest were yet scattered over the 
prairie, whose bones and sculls looked sad, indeed. One of the latter was 
noticed, near camp, with a huge wasp's nest occupying the vacuum once 
filled by the subtle organs of intellect. Strange tenant, truly, of a human 
scull,— but, perhaps, not an unfit antitype of the fierce passions that 
whilom claimed it as their dwelling place. 

A specimen of the bread-root, (psoralea escuknta,) was procured from 
the creek-bank by one of the voyageurs. This is very common in the vicinity 
ci the mountuns, and attains a size from twenty to thirty inches in circum- 
ference. It is taprooted, and generally prefers the rich sandy soil of bot* 
toms and ravines,— not unfrequently penetrating to the depth of five or six 
feet. In shape, it is much like the common b^t. Its exterior is covered 
with a tiiick ngument of tough fibres, curiously interwoven, enveloping a 
white pulpy substance, which is very sweet and pleasantly tasted. 

^eday following we proceeded some twenty miles, and camped at t 
ghee eailed the Eagle's Nest. 




WlB Buu.— Av* n 



W0LV£8,.~TUEIR SAGACllT. 7f 



A few scatteringf trees at the ri^ht of the bottom, here voMik the tnnsi- 
tion to the high prairie. One ot these was the war-eagle's eyry* upon 
which she rears her annual brood, and teaches it to soar £r away, or levy 
tribute from the surrounding a ildemess. 

The proud bird of Jove was yet sailing aJoft, in silent majesty, almost lost 
to vision in the long space of intervening blue that toid the grandeur of her 
flight ; and, tinged witli the purple and gold of the setting sun, she seemed 
looking down with a jealous eve upon the unwonted invaders of he 
earthly home. A few light clouds, garnished with day's departing glory 
danced athwart the western sky, as the full moon arose, hastening to r^ 
onter.her nightly patliway, and course amid the array of glittering worlds, 
and smile upon the wide realms of Solitude ; — while countless herds of 
giving buf^o covered the prairies on either side of the broad and silent 
nver ; and naught met the listening ear, save the dolesome hootiuff of the 
Budnight owl, as she resumed her nocturnal ditty, to enhance Xne deep 
melancholy of loneliness ; or the shrill whistlings of the prairie-winds, as 
they sported in mirth and chanted their requiems to the dying year ; or the 
terrific bellowings of the hoarse*toned bison, the softening cadence of whose 
voices sounded trebly moumfuf as it swept far along and became lost in 
the distance ; or yet, the dismal bowlings of the hali^tarved wolves, that 
gathered by scores upon every hiU*top and renewed, in more piteous accents, 
their ceaseless concert ; — au these united to invest the scene, so magnifi- 
cent in itself, with a savage wildness, at once incitive of terror and admi- 
nition« 

In our progress during tue day I remarked, at frequent intervals, bare 
places coated with saline efflorescences, and occasional plats of fine bluish 
grass, (herba 8alee,}-*appearances quite common from tiiis onward. 

Our night slumbers were disturbed by the quick discharge of firearms, 
which instantly brought every man to his feet, rifie in hand. The cause 
of this alarm was the appearance of a mad wolf among the caravan ani- 
mals, and several shots were fired before the guard could despatch him. 
He proved one of the largest of his species, and looked fearful as his 
blood-red eyeballs and foaming mouth were exposed by the camp-fire. 

In the morning it was ascertained he had bitten nine head of horses and 
cattle. 

The buflaJo range afibrds every variety of wolves, common to the moun- 
tains and regions stili further west Of these there are five distinct classi- 
fiCHtions, viz : The big white, or buffido wolf ; the shaggy brown ; the 
bhkck ; the gray, or prairie wolf ; and tlie cayeute, (wa-chunka-monet,) or 
medicine-wolf of the Indians. 

The white and brown wolves are the most numerous, and follow the 
bofialo in bands of hundreds, subsisting upon the carcases of such as die 
of themselves or are slaughtered as their necessities demand. 

These wolves behave with great sagacity in their predatorv operaticms, 
and appear to exercise a perfect understanduig and concert of action with 
Bach other on such occasions. First, stationing themselves l^ files at 
given distances along the course their intended victim is expected to run, 
t^wo or more of them enter the herd of unconscious liufiblo^ and, singling ^ i 



80 A MAD BULL. 

out the fattest one, drive it to the track at which their companions await 
to take part in the grand race« This done, the victim is made to ran 
the gauntlet between two rows of wolves. As it advances, others jom 
their fresh numbers to the chase, till at length, tired down and exhausted 
in strength, the ill-fated animal falls ready prey to their greediness. The 
poor creature is first hamstrung to prevent its escape, and then literally 
devoured alive ! 

The black wolf is seldom met with in these parts. It nearly equals the 
white and brown in size, and is fully as laree as the common cur-dog. 

The prairie wolf is not more than half the size of the above mentioned, 
and much less ferocious. Its color is of a dark gray, and its fur quite 
soft and fine. 

The cayeute or medicine-wolf compares with the common feist, and is 
of a grayish color, much like that of the wild rabbit of the States. Its 
fur is fine and thick, and might be turned to good account for the manu- 
facture of caps, mufis, &c. 

The Indians cherish many superstitious notions in regard to this ani- 
mal, and hold it in great veneration. They consider it as the messenger 
employed by the Great Spirit, on special occasions, to herald the approach 
of events interesting to the welfare of his red children, and for tiiat reason 
they are never known to harm or molest it. 

Just at dayliffht, a lar^e band of buflalo crossed the river nearly oppo- 
site to camp. It was headed by an old bull, that led the way, granting 
and bellowing as he advanced, as if in mock pereonation of the bugleman ot 
a corps of cavalry. Some three or four hundred cows and calves fol- 
lowed, side by side, with marked and regular tread, like platoons of infantry 
marching in set step to music, presenting a truly comical exhibition. 

A voifogeur seized his rifle and saluted with its contents the music- 
master and captam^neral of the advancing army, as he was about to ascend 
the river bank, m an instant the whole detachment to ^ right about 
face," and retreat precipitately to the rearward shore, with no other 
music than the clatter of hoofs and the splashing of water, or order than 
the confused rivalry for speedy escape from the unexpected presence of 
danger. 

OcU 20lh. Resuming our course, during the forenoon, the stranf<c de- 
portment of a buflalo bull near the trail arrested attention. 

He was running in a circle, at the height of his speed, and narrowing 
its sphere at each gyration. Several of us rode out to him, — but he siill, 
continued, (with frothinjg mouth and protruding tongue, swollen to the 
utmost distention of his jaws, rolling eye-balls, like globes of clotted gore; 
and bellowing for pain,) following the fast^ecreasing limits of his strange 
course, regaraless of our presence. 

He soon commenced whirling round and round, with faltering, half 
stumbling steps, and finally fell prostrate before us, apparently in tiie last 
paroxysm of mortal agony. In vdin he struggled to rise, while his tongue | 
Died from between his jaws, chafed in fruitiess efibrt to close them, and his 
head, keeping time with the convulsive throes of his fiatst-waning strength, 
tore up the prairie-sod and lashed the ground in the mad fury of efiS>rt. 



BIG Jm STILL UNFORTUNATE. %l 

The spectacle was one of the most striking exhibitimiB of ezeinciatiiig 
pain I ever witnessed. Even the rough moiintaineera were excited to 
bity, and gladly alleviated his miseries by hastening his end. A friendly 
bulJet put a period to his suf^rings, and placed him &r beyond the reach 
of summer's heat and winter's cold, mad wolves and all the inexpressible 
horrors of hydrophobia. 

At our noon encampment we commenced the process of '* making 
meat," preparatory to passing a long distance devtjild of game ; and, as the 
reader may be anxious to know what kind of an operation this is, I will 
explain. It consists simply in cutting into thin slices the boneless parts 
of buffalo, or other meat, and drying tliem in the wind or sun. Meat thus 
cured may be preserved for years without salt. Ropes of raw hide were 
stretched around the waggons, upon which the results of our labor were 
left to the £nishing efiects of the wind and sun as we proceeded, — thus 
making an important saving in the item of time. 

It is astonishing how long a time fresh meat may be kept without injury, 
upon the grand prairies, in dry weather, when it receives the free access 
of air. Some of that killed on our first arrival among buffalo was yet 
hanging to the waggons, as sweet and sound as ever. 1 have known it to 
be preserved, in this way, for ten or twelve days in the heart of summer. 
Meat, packed in snow, while in a frozen state, may be retained fresh for 
months without injury. I have known an instance of its being thus kept 
from January till June. The air is so pure and dry, it requires but littje 
efS)rt to preserve meat, for any requisite length of time, ahnost at any 
season of the year. 

Our hunter, having proceeded in advance of the waggons during the 
afternoon, was overtaken about sundown at a place selected for night- 
camp, which he had ornamented with the carcases of three cows,— 4Lnd 
there again, was soon witnessed another display of rare feasting, such as 
mountaineers alone know how to appreciate and enjoy. 

The night proved cold and uncomfortable, and the bright-glowing camp 
fires presented most captivating inducements to the shivering sentinels, as 
they paced their dreary rounds, to step within its cheering iimuence. Big 
Jim, who was on the third ^ relieve," thought it too bad he should be com- 
peUed to suffer so much from cold, while a nice warm fire was permitted 
to waste its kind heat upon the bleak air of night, without so much as one 
to enjoy its beneficence. 

No, it would not do. " Why mayn't I just as well stand guard at the 
fire, as elsewhere ? I can, I'm sure. I'll siarid this time, and not lay slsI 
did before, and then there'll be no danger of falling asleep and burning 
one's self; nor'U they have the chance to twit me about lying guard and 
burning shins. I'll head 'em this time, and they wont Imow the difl^r- 



ence." 



So saying, he approached the fire, and, giving it a kick, extended hit 
hands towards its blaze, — ever and anon rubbing them together and then 
again spreading them to receive its pleasing warmth ; then turning his 
back to partake fdfke of its comforting influences and obviate the jealousy 
chat might otherwise be engendered between front and rear. 



82 JOHNSON'S CREEK. 

Now, he stands attent, — ^he hears something move. He stretches himself 
to his foil height, on tip-toe, and gazes in toe black envelope of surround- 
ing niffht, made doubly obscure in contrast with theiretulgence of the 
camp-me. 

•* How dark it has px)wn !" said Jim. " What can it be 7 Wonder if 
it's Indians. Pooh ! it's nothing but the wind. Bless me, I can't see the 
nse of a poor devil's standing guard on such a dark night as this ! (step- 
ping backward still nearer the fire,) he can*t see nothing, if he does. 
Feugh, — what is it smells so ? (turning round.) Good gracious, how hot 
my back is !" 

The my^stery of Jim's present predicament is easily explained. The 
skirts of his jeans coat, having come in contact with the wind-tossed flames, 
caught fire, and were bumea to the shoulders before he was aware of the 
accident The garment was rendered entirely useless, and eveu his panta- 
loons were burnt to his skin, in several places. 

Jim began to think it as bad to stand as to lay guard, and concluded 
that, of the two, fire was more dangerous than Indians ; — for, one thing 
, was certain, the Indians had never yet injured him, but he could not say as 
much of fire I 

In the mominfi;, as may be supposed, our hero's last mishap was the 
prolific subject of comment, and the wags were promptly on the alert to 
amuse themselves still further at his expense : 

'* Say, would you believe it ! — That's the way Jim 's hit upon to 5^*710 in 
this crowd, — ^he bums up his old coat to make a light /" 

'* Ah, ha ! So he means to shine by the light of his old clothes, sad 
come it over us in an underhand manner ! Jim, that '11 never do ; — ^I teil 
you, once for all." 

" Wonder if he wont bum up himself next ?" 

*^ He ? No. He's too green and sappy to bum himself, and so he takes 
his old clothes !" 

*^ Poor Jim. Shoot grass, kill horse, break gun, bum shoe, scorch foot, ' 
lose hat, stick coat in him fire I Poor fellow. No can do without Jim, 
no how." 

The third day succeeding the last mentioned adventure, we passed a 
stream, called by the traders Johnson's creek, in memory of a man by thai 
name who was murdered in its vicinity, several years since, by the 
Indians. 

He was a missionary, and on his way to Oregon, with a party headed fay 
one John Gray. As they were about to raise camp, one mcmung, a band 
of Yanktau-Sioux came charging over the hills, and preparations were 
made to resist them. Such a course Mr. Johnson felt scrupulous of acced- 
ing to, and stoutly protested against it, — affirming it to be wnHig. 

As the savagds approached, the ill-fated man stepped forward to meet 
tjhem unarmed, despite the remonstrances of his comrades, — unagining the 
Indians would not Kill him, as he was a missionary and had came to do 
them good. 

They, however, proved regardless of him or his intended good, a^ he 
ftiQ the victim of his own foolish credulity. Three Indians feu in the con* 
ffict that ensued, and he and they filled the same grave. 



THE BRAVE BEAR. 83 



MMMMMM^««%AAMi^ ^*^^m0^m^^^^^0^ ^^m0t0t0tf^^^ 



Oct 24th. About noon we crossed Gonneville's creek, a large easteilj 
affloent of the Platte. This stream also derives fts name from a trapper, 
killed near it in an Indian %ht, some eight years since. 

Upon the south bank of GK>nneville's creek, ten or twelve miles from the 
river, is a singular natural fcHinatioo, known as tlje Court House, or 
Mcl^irlan's Casde, on account of its foncied resemblance to such a struc- 
ture. It rises in an abrupt quadrangular form, to a height of three or 
four hundred feet, and covers an area of two hundred yards in len^^th by 
one hundred and fifty broad. Occupying a perfectly level site in an open 
prairie, it stands as the proud palace of Sohtnde, amid her boundless do- 
mains. 

Its position commands a view of the country for forty miles around, and 
meets the eye of the travellev for several successive dayn, in journeying 
up the Platte. We have been in sight of it for three day.s and even now 
seem no nearer than at first, notwith^tandfng our- coarse, nioanwhiio, has 
borne not ^j* from a direct line towards it 

Here, for the first time, I remarked the deceptiveness of distances, on 
the high prairies and in regions adjacent to the mountains. Sometimes an 
object will appear as if within a mile, at most, which cannot be reached 
short of fifteen or twenty miles ; then, again, objects will seem to be much 
further off than they really are. 

I attribute this, in part, to three several causes : — First, the variable state 
of the atmosphere, in regard to density. Second, the absence or plenitude 
of humid exhalations and effluviie in the air of dificrent regions. Third, 
the peculiar locality of some places in regard to the reception of the sun'a 
lays. 

In passing from Gonneville's creek to Fort Platte, we encountered no 
more bufilalo, — ^these animals having been driven back into the high prairies 
by bands of ibttrolling Indians. 

If the prospect had hitherto been lonesome, it now seemed threefold 
lonely. The hard-beaten footpaths that had furrowed the bottoms and 
plains, in all directions, ever since our first entrance to the bufialo range. 
Were still seen ; but, unhonored by the presence and unmarked by the foot- 
prints of their whUom travellers, they looked li^e the once oft-trodden 
streets of some deserted city. 

Late in the afternoon we were joined by two engages firom Fort Platte, 
whose object it was to hasten our advance. Soon after, we entered upon 
a stretch of burnt prairie, and were compelled to travel till daylight the 
next morning, before a sufficiency of grass coald be found for a camping 
place. 

Oct. a^th. Resuming our course about midday, we had proceeded only 
a few miles, when a mounted Iiidian appeared upon the opposite bank of 
the river, and accosted us : 

*' Chay, cuUo ! — Hanno chaum-pa-monet ha Mena-huska tour^" (Tell 
me, friend I — ^Are those the Long-knife's* waggons ?) 

* This term eeems to call for a word of explanation. Our company was designated 
by the Indians as the Long-knife, or American company,~a teim by which a.1 



84 BULL TAIL. 

On being answered in the affirmative, he commenced crossing to join xu. 

Plunging into the river with hjs horse, he had proceeded about midwav 
of the stream, when the panting* beast suddenly sank into the quicksand, 
throwing its rider head foremost into the water. At length, having efiected 
a ford, he hurried up to us, profusely dripping with wet . as evidence of 
the thoroughness ot his recent drenching. 

First shaking hands with the company, he began to inquire about liqiior, 
affirming the waggons contained that article, and adding, it was ^ right the 
Long-knife should bring the fire-water to give to the red man," as did the 
Bad-medicine, — ^but it was witmff to sell it For his part he would not boy 
the fire-water. He would buy blankets, knives, beads, and ammunition,^ 
not the fire-water ; but the Long-knife should give it to him. 

The personage thus introduced was one of the chiefs of the Brulc- 
Sioux, and sported the name of Marto-cogershne, or Brave Bear. lie was 
a turbulent fellow, that proved the pest of his village traders. Slim and 
spare-made in person, he was somewnat pale and sickly looking, and seemed 
about thirty years of age. His arms were a short fusee, with a bow and 
arrows slung to his shoulders, and a butcher-knife affixed to his belt. His 
hair was lon^, parted in front, and turned backwards ; that upon the occiput, 
being bound m a cluster with panther's skin, hung in a plated cue and 
almost trailed the ground, while a lone eagle's plume completed his head- 
dress. A robe enveloped his body, which, with moccasins, leggins, and 
breech-cloth, constituted his full costume, — a description of dress respond- 
ing to that almost universally common among mountain tribes. 

We were soon joined by others of his people, who eagerly enquired re- 
specting the amount of liquor brought with us. 

Among these were several individuals recognized by our voyageurs as 
old acquaintances ; particularly one, an old chief called Bull Tail, (Tah- 
tunga-sana,) who was distinguished in attire from ail his fellows by the 
addition of a hair-seal cap and a frock-coat, which he had received as pre 
sents from the whites. 

One of our party gave a favorable account of tlie old fellow, and related 
a story much to his credit 

The narrator, during the previous winter, while searching for stray horses 
among the hills, had become so bewildered he was unable to find his ynj 
back to camp. He thui^wandered for four successive davs, unarmed, with 
out food, and with but a single robe for covering. His destiny would, 
doubtless, have been to perish, had not the kind hearted Tah-tunga-sana 
discovered him, and, pitying his forlorn condition, taken him to the village, 
upon his own horse, some twenty miles ofT, going himself on foot the entire 
distance. Here, the lost one was treated to the best the lodge of his de^ 
liverer afilirded, and, when sufficiently recovered, he was escorted to the 
nearest station of the whites. 

I turned ior another look at the worthy chieftain, who now rode up 
and greeted his protege with much cordiality. 

Americans are known among them. The American Fur Company, employing almnt 
•zdusively Frenchmen, or individuals speaking the French language, receives Um 
appellation of Wali-ceicha, or the Bad-medicine company, — a phnse universally ap 
piitd to the French aniony; the mountain tribes. 



SPEECH OF MABTOCOGERSHNE. 87 

He appeared to be about eighty years of age, and was graj-headed, 
spare-visaged, and much wrinkled. Hia coat, buttoned close around him, 
served for a robe, while his matted ear-locks disclosed upon the one side a 
raven's and upon the other a hawk's feather, for ornaments. His face, 
fike those of his companions, was liberailj bedaubed with vermilion, and 
each cheek embellished with alternate spots of white and black, by way of 
variety. His only weapons were a bow, arrows, and a tomahawk-pipe. 

As a whole, he presented rather a shabby and iudricrous appearance, 
that, were it not for the recollection of his worthy conduct, would have ex* 
cited, in the mind of the beholder, fieur more of contempt than interest. 

A Sioux squaw, the wife of a French engage, accompanying us on her 
return from the States, now received the marked attention of our visitors. 
It is rare that an Indian will shake hands with a woman ; but now, tiiey 
might break through the restraints of custom ; this was a special case ; she 
had visited the white man's lodge, and could tell them many interesting 
things, — she was something more than a common squaw^ — ^they might 
shake hands with her. She was accordingly greeted in a most flattering 
manner, and found tedious employment in answering the numerous ques- 
tions with which she was plied. 

Contmuing for a few miles further, we made camp just at nightfall, and 
were prompUy joined by a new recruit of inquisitive visitors, irom an ad- 
joining Village. 

The whole throng of Indians now numbered some thir^, and demanded 
a ** talk " with the Long-knife. Upon this a circle was formed, with the 
whites upon one side and Indians upon the other, when Marto-cogershne 
opened the harangue in behalf of his people. 

He commenced in a low, distinct tone of voice. His robe, dawn loosely 
around him, was held to its place by the left hand, exposing his right arm 
and shoulder. As he proceeded he became more animated, and seemed to 
enter into the full spirit of his discourse. The modulations of his voice, 
its deep intonations and expressive cadences, coupled with a corresponding 
appropriateness of every look and ^sture, presented one of the most per- 
fect specimens of delivery I ever witnessed. 

His speech, as imperfectly translated upon the occasion, rrn as follows : 

** Long-knife : We are glad to see you — we are glad to see your people, 
and shake you all by the hand, that we ibay smoke together and^be 
friends. 

" Long-knife : We are glad the Great Spirit has put it into your heart to 
letum with the road-travellers, (waggons,) and the white bujffido, (oxen,) 
and the medicme-dogs, (hcnrses,) bluing fire-water, (whiskey,) blankets, 
and many other goodthings, ere yet the chill winds and snows have com- 
pelled His childrien to light the lodge-fires of winter. The Long-knife 
kings choice things to the red man, and it is good that we trade. (Ap- 
plause.) 

** The Great Spirit is good to His children. To us He has given the 
Imflklo, the elk, the deer, and the antelope, that we may be fed and clothed, 
iudd furnished with lodges to shelter us from the storms and cold. To us 
He has given the mountains and prairies, for hunting grounds. For us He 
has tau^t the streams to flow, and phuted trees upon their banks, to give 



88 THE REPLY. 

116 food and drink, that we may meet aroiind our lodge-fires with comfort 
tnd rejoice in His goodness, even while he spreads his white robe upon the 
hills,, and lays the couch of winter upon the plains. 

''AH these — all this country — everything that the Long-knife beholds an 
ours. The Yellow-hair* said truly ^— all, all belong to us ; — ^we have them 
— ^the Great Spirit has given them to us, — they are ours ! (Great ap> 
plause.) 

^ Long-knife : You have come to trade with us : — it is good. Your 
people are wise, and make many things ; — ^you bring them to us, and we 
take them ; but we give you robies and horses in their stead ; — we pay you 
for them all. Yet, uie Long-knife pays not lor all he takes from us. 

** Do I say the Lonff-knile steals ? No. The Long;-knife will not steaL 
He says, none but bad men steal, and the Long-knife is not bad. But yet 
he takes our property vnthout paying for it ! He kills our came, he eats our 
meat, he bums our wood, he drinks our water, and he travels our country^— 
and what does he give the red man in exchange for all this 7 (Unbounded 
applause.) 

"• Long-knife and friend : My people are generous, — ^they are bmvey— 
(hey are all soldiers. The Long-knife bears the fire-water in his road* 
travellers, (waggons ;) — we have heard of it and are glad. 

" My people would drink of the fire-water that their f^trong hearts may 
become stronger. It is good that they should drink it, — ^it is good that ttie 
Long-knife should give it to them ; that we be twice glad to see him, and 
bless him in our hearts while we drink around our lodge-fires. (Ajh 
plause.) 

•* Long-knife : Would you be our friend ? Then give us the fire-water. 
My people are generous, but they are brave. The Long-knife has taken 
our property^ let him refuse not the fire-water, lest they te angry and rise 
like the mountain bear, nerved for conflict. Then will they take it of^ 
themselves and avenge the wrongs of the red man .'" (Great applause.) 

Upon this, the Brave Bear resumed bis seat, and the commandant began 
his reply, whieh was rendered into the ISioux language, by their inter- 
preter. The purport of it was : 

'* It is true, the Great Spirit is good to His children. He made all things 
of which the Brave Bear speaks, and He has given them to his children. 
The white and the red man are alike his children; the buffido, the elk, the 
deer, and the antelope, with the wood, the water, and the whole countzy 
arotmd, equally belong to both. 

" I and many people have come as friends, to trade with yon. We have 
smoked with vou before. The Long-knife takes nothing from you he pays 
not for. He buys the things he bears to you in a far distant country, and 
throws for them the white-iron.f He brings them to you and swaps them 
lor robes and horses. 

*^ He takes nothing without paving for it, unless it be that which theGieat 
Spirit has given equally to his enliven, — ^the white and the red man. 

* Tills is the name applied, by the Indians, to Gen. Clarke, one of the leaders of tbi 
first party of whites that ever croased the niountaim. An aUuaion is here had to an 
eipression made use of in his talk to the Sioux on that occasion. 

t Silver. This phrase is the Sioux mode of expressing the act of paying moosf 
for any article. 



TAH-TUNGA-SANA'S ADDRESS. 89 

" Would the Brave Bear and his people be friends to us ? We are friend* 
ly — we are ffenerous. We will give tobacco to the Brave Bear, that he 
and his people may smoke and be our friends. But the Long-knife will 
not here give him the hre-water. Let him come to the Long-knife's lodcei 
then shall he have of it a little, that he may bless the Long-knife in hit 
heart. The Brave Bear can have none now. 

" The Brave Bear says, his people are generous, but they are brave^— they 
are all sddiers. Be it sa My people are generous,— ^«y are brave— 
they are all soldiers ! Does the Brave Bear wish ior fight ? Sly people are 
ready to either smoke or fight ! The Brave Bear says, unless I give him 
the nre-water for his people, ihey will nerve their arms for conflict, and 
take it! Will they? Let them try! The Long-knife says, lei them 
tryr 

The conclusion of this reply was received with a bad grace by those to 
whom it was addressed, and created great excitement among them. Seve- 
ral left for the village, obviously for the purpose of arming and returning 
with increased numbers to the meditated attack. 

Meanwhile our arms were put in a proper condition for resistance, and 
all needful arrangements made to give the assailants a warm reception 
should they commence upon us. This done, our commandant brought a 
few plugs of tobacco, and, laying them before the Brave Bear, said : 

** It is good that the Brave Bear aiid his people should smoke. Here is 
tobacco^ — ^let him take it to his warriors that we and they be friends ;•— or 
wouM he rather fight?" 

Bull Tail, (Tah-tunga-eana,) who had had hitherto remained silent, now 
arose and addressed his companions: 

^Tah-tunga-sana is grieved at the words of the Brave Bear. Would 
my brothers fight the Long-knife, and rob him of what he has brought to ii8| 
that they may become fools by drinking the fire-water? 

" Who shall then bring us medicine^irons (guns) to kill our meat ; or 
knives to butcher it ; or blankets and beads for our squaws ; or the red- 
earth (vermilion) to paint our faces when we arm for war ? And, who 
shall bring us all the other things so needful for us ? 

" The Long-knife will not do it. You rob him. No one will bring them 
to us. We shall be without them ! We shall be poor indeed ! 

*^ Brothers : Why would you drink the fire-water, and become fools ? 
Would it not be better that the Long-knife no more bring it to us ? We 
give for it our robes and our horses ; — ^it does us no go(xi. It makes us 
poor. We fight our own brothers, and kill those we love, because the fire- 
water is in us and makes our hearts bad ! The fire-water is the red man's 
enemy! 

'* brothers: Tah-tunga-eana is old; — ^will you listen lo him. He has 
been always the friend of tlie pale- face. When first the Yellow-hair (Gen. 
Clarke) came to the red man's lodge, Tah-tunga-sana took him by the hand. 
He will always take the pale (ace by the hand.' He loves the pale-face. 
The pale- face is his brother, — ^he is our brother ! — He brings us many good 
thin^. 

** Brothers : The Long-knife has spoken weU. It is good that we smoke, 
— 4hat we, and the Long-knite, and liis pec^le may be mends. Let us nr- 

8* 



90 THE CHIMNEY. 

cept his present, and go to our lodges, and there tell to our chfldren how 
kind the Long- knife is to the red man." 

The speech was received in silence^— no one expressing either approliA- 
tion or dissent, as the old man resumed his seat The Brave Bear hong 
his head sullenly, but said nothing. 

The talk had evidently come to a close. At last. Bull Tail arose, um!* 
shaking hands with the commandant and each of tlio company, took the 
tobacco and left for the village. The others soon after, one by one, foUow* 
ed his example, and we were finally rid of their unwelcome presence i^ 
not, however, until they had stolen an axe and several other articlesi de- 
spite the strictness of our vigilance. 



CHAPTER VII. , 

The Chinmey.— A bet--Spur of the Rocky MonptaiiiB.— Scott's Blnff—Romantio 
scenery. — Mimic city. — A pyrsmid. — A monument — An elevated garden. — ^JHfonn!- 
tain sheep. — An Eden. — Death in camp. — ^The wanderer's grave. — ^Horse Creek 
and gcdd. — Goche's hole. — Arrival at Fort Platte. — Remarks by the way.*** 
Prairie travel. — Locality and description of the Fort — ^Indian lodges. — ^Migiatoiy 
habits of mountain and prairie tribes. — Scenes at Fort — Drunken Indians.— IVa* 
gical event— Indian funeraL — Speech of Etespa-huska on the death of hii 
fitther. 

Oct. 26th, Raising camp at daylight we resumed our way, and soon 
afterwards arrived opposite the ^ Chimney," an extraordinary natural curi 
osity that had continued in view and excited our admiration for some four 
days past 

This singular formation surmounts a conical eminence which rises, isola- 
ted and lonely, in the open prairie, reaching a height of three hundred feet 
It is composed of terrene limestone and marl, quadnngularly shaped, like 
the spire of some church, six feet by ten at its base, with an altitude of 
more than two hundred feet, — making, together with tlie mound, an eleva- 
tion of five hundred feet* A grand and imposing spectacle, truly ; — a 
wonderful display of the eccentricity of Nature ! 

How came such an immense pile so singularly situated ? What causes 
uited their aid to throw up this lone column, so majestic in its solitude, to 
overlook the vast and unbroken plains that surround it ? 

The " Chimney " is situated about three miles to tlie left of the moun- 
tain trail, though it seems no more than eight hundred yards distant Upon 
this question our party entertained no small diversity of opinion. Some 
of the less knowing were confident it could not exceed a half mile; and 
one fellow offered to bet five dollars he could run to it in fifteen minutes. 

^Formerl^r the " Chimney" was much higher than at present and could be <Bi- 
tlnctly seen in a clear day as fiir as Ash creek. The wino and the rain are contxatt- 
ally reducinff it ; and it is said to be ftdl fifty feet less than it was nine years aga 
Cajcidating nora this datum, what must have been its altitude no longer remote than a 
couole of centuries ! 



A MONUMEirr. 91 

The banter vna prompt'y accepted, and the ** greenhorn,'* doffing hia 
coat and hat, started in full expectation of winning the wager. But, in* 
itead of fifteen, it took hitn forty-five minutos to reach the spot! 

The day after passing the ** Chimney," we entered a broad defile of 
lofi^ ridges, and made camp. This locality u known as Scott's Blnf^ 
which is, properly speaking, a wing of the Riocky Mountains. 

From Ash creek to this place, an almost precipitous wall of arenaceous 
rock, limestone, and marl, shuts the high prairie irom the river bottoms. 
As the traveller proceeds, this wall or ledgo gradually increases in height, 
and recedes from the river, sometimes to a distance of thirty or forty mues, 
till it unites in a chain of hills, many of which are covered with sturdy 
pines, and others are mere hea{)s of naked sand or indurated earth. The 
ridge then continues its course until it at length becomes united ^nth the 
lateral chain of the Rocky Mountains, which £>und8 the ** Plains of Liara- 
mie " upon the southeast. 

At Scott's BluiT these hills crowd themselves abruptly towards the 
Phtte, where they present a most romantic and picturesque sceneiy. 
' Our camp was in a rich opening, or vidley, two miles wide, and walled 
in upon the right and left by perpendicular masses of earth and rock, that 
tower to a height of from three to eight hundred feet In reaching it, the 
trail bore leftward from the river, about seven miles, through a level 
prairie, by which we were inducted to the valley, without any perceptible 
variation of its general surface. 

Near the entrance, upon our left, the spectacle was grand and impoeinff 
beycHid description. It seemed as if Nature, in mere sportiveness, had 
thought to excel the noblest works of art, and rear up a mimic city as the 
grand metropolis of her empire. 

There stood the representations of palaces, with their domes and balus- 
trades ; churches, with their spires and cupolas ; and streets, with their 
gigantic dwellings, stores, workHshops, and ware-houses. And there, also, 
were parks, pleasure-grounds, and public squares, aU so admirably defined 
by the agency of the winds and rains of ages, that the traveller might 
readily imagine himself to have arrived within the precincts of the desert- 
ed city of some peopleless country, whose splendor and magnificence once 
more than vied with the far-famed Palmyra of the desert, even in its best 
days. 

To the right arose a pile of sand-rock and marl in pyramidal form, 
Cfaree hundr^ feet high, that occupied its prairie site detached from hill or 
other eminence. 

Near this stood a more singular natural formation than any pre 
viously noticed. It described a complete circle, of one thousand feet in 
curcumference, and attainted an altitude of not far from four hundred feet* 
Its sides were of great regularity, and represented masses of solid mason- 
work, rising abruptly till within sixty or seventy feet of the summit, where 
they aecline in a blunt, cone-iike manner, reducing the periphery to one 
third that of its base. At this point la rrposed a semi-spherical form, reg- 
ulariy jutting with a gradual pwell upon ail pides — then tapering to an oval 
shape till near the apex, at which the wlitue uiai5i> i» Furmounted by a rude 
imitation of sculptured flame, pointing upwards, to the sun, ad if thi« 



92 DEATH IN CAMP. 

BtFanee monument of nature had been erected in honor of the great B0111G8 
of li^t and heat ! 

SSa further to the right, upon the river bank, is another immenBe nto^ 
exceeding either of the before described in altitude. It is an oblong 
square, and presents erect lateral walls upon three sides, leaving upon the 
fourth a gradual acclivity which faces the river. Its sumnut expands 
into a beautiful terrace containing an area of several acres, which at the 
proper season is adorned with herbs, flowers, shrubbery, and grass, like a 
pleasure jg^arden upon some house-top, and commands a view of the whole 
country, Ending enchantment to the neighboring scenes. Its base is about 
one mile long by twelve hundred yards wide, and points endwise from the 
river towards the valley. 

Then comes the continuous wall which bounds the locality upon the 
right This likewise presents a level summit, varying from fifteen yards 
to a half mile in breadth, for a distance of ten miles, when, slowly sinking 
in its course, it finally becomes lost in the prairie. 

Covered with grass and shrubs, it is the favorite home of the mountiin 
sheep, where she breed» and rears her young, secure in her inaccessible 
fastnesses ; and ofttimes from its precipitous edge, at elevations of six or 
eight hundred feet above the adjacent prairie, will her head and mammeth 
horns be seen, peering in wonder upon the rare traveller, as he passes 
•down the valleyr * *^ 

The interval between the two mural ridges is of uniform width for about 
ten miles, and is watered by a beautiful stream nearly the whole distance, 
when it inducts tlie traveller to the open prairie, — cleaving the immense wall 
which bounded it upon the leftwara, at his entrance, transformed to high 
conical hills, covered with pines, and almost lost to view in the growing 
space ; while that upon his right, diminishing in size, gradually disappears 
and unites with the i&r-spreading plain. 

Most of the varieties of wild truits indigenous to the mountains are 
found in this vicinity, and also numerous b£mds of buffalo, elk, deer, sheep, 
and antelope, with the grizzly bear. 

In the summer months the prospect is most deUghtful, and aflbrds to the 
admiring beholder an Eden of fruits and flowers. No higher encomium 
could be passed upon it than by employing the homely phrase of one of 
our voyageurs. In speaking ot tlie varied enchantments of its scenery at 
that season, he said : " I could die here, then,— certain of baing not fisLr from 
heaven !" 

Before leaving this romantic spot, feelings of gloom and melancho- 
ly usurped those of pleasing admiration, by tlie death of one of our 
number. 

The deceased was on his way to the mountains for the recovery of his 
health, with a frame fearfully reduced by the ravages of that fell destroyer, 
consumption. For several days past he had declined rapidly, owing to 
the weather and the unavoidable exposure incident to our modfe of travel- 
ling. To-day the cold was more than usually severe, and an uncomforta- 
ble rain and sleet commenced soon after camping. In an attempt to pass 
from the waggons to the fire, he staggered and fell ; — before any one of 
us could arrive to his assistance, he had breathed his last. 



THE WANDERER'S GRAVE. 93 

We buried him upon the bonk of the stream that wends its course 
through the yalley. Darkness, with its sable pall, had enveloped the 
scene as we covered him from view, and left the winds and the wolves to 
howl his requiem, until the voice of spring shall bid the wild-flowers 
grow and bloom upon his grave. 

This lovely valley had tefore this witnessed the death'^cene of one who 
left his bones to bleach within its limits. His name was Scott, from whom 
the neighboring eminences derive their present appellation. 

Attracted by the enchanting beauty of the place and the great abundance 
of game the vicinity aff )rded, he wandered hither alone and made it his 
temporary residence. While thus enjoying the varied sweets of solitude, 
he Decame the prey of sickness and gasped his life away; — and none 
were there to watch over him, but the sun by day and the stars by niriit: 
or fiin his fevered brow, save the kindly breezes ; or bemoan his habeas 
&te, other than the gurgling stream that sighed its passing sympathy be- 
' side the couch of death! 

There is a mournful interest and a touching melancholy associated with 
this simple story, that must thrill with emotion the finer feelings of our 
nature. The incident, which had so recently transpired, contributed to en« 
hance these gloomy sensations to an extent I never before experienced. I 
felt— I cannot tell how. I felt like giving vent to my feelings in verse- 
Yet, I cannot write poetry. I made the attempt, however, a!nd here is the 
xesult before the reader : 

THE WANDERER'S GRAVE. 

Away from friends, away from home, 

And all the heart holds dear, 
A weary wand'rer laid him down^^ 

N<Nr kindly aid was near.— 

And sickness preyM upon his frame 

And told its taie of woe, 
While sorrow mark'd his pallid cheeks 

And sank his spirit low. 

Nor waiting friends stood round his coach 

A healing to impart^ — 
Nor human voice spoke S3rmpathy, 

To sooth his aching Imrt 

The stars of night his watchers were,— 

His fim the rude winds' breath, 
And while the^ sigh'd their hollow moans, 

He closed his eyes in death. 

Upon the prairie's vast expanse 

This weary wand'rer lay ; 
And far from friends, and far from home/ 

He breath'd his life away ! 



94 HORSE CR£EK.-GOU>. 

A lovely valley marks the spot 

That claims his lowly hea ; 
Bat o'er the wand'rer's hapless fate 

No friendly tear was shed. 

• No willing grave received the corse 
Of this poor lonely one ; — 
His hones, alas, were left to hleach 
And moulder 'neath the sun ! 

The night-wolf howlM his requiem, — 

The rude winds danced his dirge ; 
And e'er anon, in mournful chime, 

Sigh'd forth the mellow surge ! 

The Spring shall teach the rising grass 

To twine for him a tomb ; 
And, o'er the spot where he doth lie. 

Shall bid the wild flowers bloom. 

But, far from friends, and far from home, 

Ah, dismal thought, to die ! 
Oh, let me 'mid my friends expire, 

And with my fathers lie. 

Oct 2101. The day being clear and pleasant, we travelled rapidly, and 
in the course of the afternoon reached Horse creek. This stream is a 
large affluent of the Platte, heading in the Black Hills, and, tracing its way 
in a northeasterly direction, through a timberless country, (in many places 
mere barren wastes,) makes its debouchment nearly lilteen miles above 
Scott's Bluff: 

The region adjacent to its head is represented as being rich in minerals, 
among which is gold ; and from my limited information respecting its geo- 
logicsQ character, I am inclined to accredit the rumor. The story runs 
thus: 

Six or eight years since, Du Shay, an old French hunter, while ranging 
in the parts above alluded to, on crossing one of the two principal forlu 
that unite to form the main stream, observed a singular looking something 
in the creek bed, which he picked up. It was apparently a fragment of 
rock, very heavy, and contained numerous yellow specks. 

Having deposited it in his bullet-pouch for preservation, subsequently, in 
approachmg a band of buf&lo, its weight became so annoying he thought- 
lessly threw it away. The year following he visited Santa Fe, at which 
place his pouch was accidentally emptied, and, among its contents, several 
bright particles, that had become parted from the rock, attracted the atten* 
tion of tlie Mexicans. These were carefuUy gathered up, and, upon due 
examination, proved to be virgin gold. 

The old man, on his return, searched diligently for the spot that aflbrd- 
ed the treasure he had so foolishly thrown away, — ^bat (not heing inteUecU 



PRAIRIE TRAVEL. W 

mily one of the briffhteet gems of natare's casl^ and feeble and childish 
^thal) he vras unable to lind it, or even to decide upon which of the two 
streams it belonged. 

Upon one of the affluents of Horse creek, thirty or forty miles south of 
the Platte, is a beautiful valley, shut in by two riiges of precipitous hills, 
known as Goche's hole. 

This locality, in wildness and picturesque beauty, claims affinity to the 
nei^borhood of Scott's Bluff. Its area is broad and of several miles extent, 
— inacessible except at two or three points. The surrounding hills are gen- 
erally composed of marl and earthy limestone. Towering in vertical walls 
to the height of many hundred feet, they present the appearance of a 
strongly Ibrtified place. The soil is remarkably rich, wxll watered, and 
timbered, — strikingly contrasting with the nude sterility and desolation of 
the circumjacent country. 

A heavy fall of snow during the night prevented our leaving camp until 
the fourth day subsequent, when were again en route. Having paetied the 
night of Nov. Ist at Morain's Point, the next day we arrived at Fort Platte. 
This latter place is situated a short distance above the mouth of lArra- 
mie river, and is our point of present destination. 

From Horse creek to the Larramie river, the bottoms, in many places, 
aflbrded dense groves of heavy timber — the more agreeable as we bad 
been so long accustomed to open and woodless prairies. 

The geological character of the country is nearly the same with that 
previou^:Iy described — ^though possessed of greater humidity of soil. The 
formations, noticed in the vicinity of Scott's Bluff and Goclie's hole, have 
merged into strata of limestone of various shades and compactness, with 
occasional layers of primitive sandstone. a 

The prairies were beautifully undulating, and covered with lusty growths 
of dried vegetation. The hills, now and then, were ornamented wiUi a lew 
scattering pines and cedars, which stood like lonely sentinels to watch the 
progress of changing seasons. 

As some of my readers may entertain the design of visiting these remote 
regions, or passing beyond them to the more distant shores of tlie Pacific, 
it may not be deemed a digression for me to present a few hints as to the 
roost advisable mode of travelling upon this long and wearisome journey. 

A caravan of waggons should make only two camps per day. Traveliers 
should adopt the rule to start at daylight and continue until ten o'clock, 
A. M., — ^then, having halted some six hours, (if it be summer, if spring or 
fall, four only,) again resume their way till after sundown. 

Fifteen miles, upon an average, are as for as an ox team should travel 
per day, — mules or horses might keep on for twenty miles. 

Caravans ought always to lay by in rainy weather, as the wet and irrita 
tion consequent upon draught, gall the neck and shoulders of their ani 
mak and soon render tliem unfit for service ; — every precaution should be 
taken to preserve their strength and soundness, as upon them rests the sole 
dependence of a travelling company. 

A mounted party ought, as a general tiling, to observe the same rules, 



M LODGES OF MOUNTAIN INDIANS. 

and not think of averaging over twenty-l^ve miles per day. They miflbt 
travel later ; hut in such cases, they should always proportionally lengthen 
their noon halt 

In the above manner the entire journey from Indpendence to the Pacific 
may be performed without injury to animals, or the expenses attendant 
npon a relay. 

Fort Platte, beinff next to Fort HaH, the most important point on the 
loute to Oregon, caUs for a brief description. This post occupies the left bank 
of the North Fork of Platte river, three-fourths of a mile above the mouth 
of Larramie, in lat 42<' 12^ 10" north, long. 106"* 20' IS'' west from Green- 
wich,* and stands upon the direct waggon road to Oregon, vta South 
Pass. 

It is situated in the immediate vicinity of the Oglallia and Brule divisions 
of the Sioux nation, and but little remote from the Cbyennes and Arapaho 
tribes. Its structure is a fair specimen of most of the establishments em- 
ployed in the Indian trade. Its walls are ^ adobies," (sun-baked brick^ 
lovLT feet thick, by twenty high— enclosing an area of two hundred and 
fifty feet in length, by two hundred broad. At the northwest and south- 
west comers are bastions which command its approaches in all directions. 

Witbin the walls are some twelve buildings in all, consistins as follows : 
Office, store, warehouse, meat-house, smith's shop, carpenter's shop, kitchen, 
and five dwellings,— so arranged as to form a yard and cord, sufficiently 
large for the accommodation and securitv of more than two hundred head 
of animals. The number of men usually employed about the establish- 
ment is some thirty, whose chief duty it is to promote the interests of the 
trade, and otherwise act as circumstances reqmre. 

The Fort is located in a level pkdn, fertile and interesting, bounded upon 
all sides by hills, many of which present to view the nodding forms of 
pines and cedars, that bescatter their surfi9u;e, — ^while the river bottoms, at 
various points, are thickly studded with proud (growths of Cottonwood, ash, 
willow, and box-elder, thus affi>niing its needful supplies of timber and 
fuel. 

One mile south of it, upon the Larramie, is Fort John, a station of the 
American Fur Company. Between these two poets a strong opposition is 
maintained in regard to the business of the country, Uttle to the credit of 
either. 

At the time of our arrival at the Fort, two villages of Indiafis were en- 
camped near by. Their lodges, being the first I ever saw, proved objects 
of j?reat interest to me. 

The lodge of a mountain Indian consists of a frame work of light poles, 
some twenty-five feet long, bound together at the small ends, and raised fay 
planting the opposite extremities aslope, at given distances apart, so aa to 
describe a circle, at the base, converging to a triangular apex, for roof and 
aides ; — over this is spread a covering of buffido robes, so nicely dressed 
and seamed, it readily sheds rain ana excludes the fierce winds to which 
tbs country is subject. A small aperture at the top, affi)rds passage for the 

* Obg. Lt Fremont, in 1842. 



CHARACTER AND CONDITION OF THE SIOUX NATION. «7 

smoke emitted from the fire occnpyng the centre ?roond work. The 
entrance is at the side, where a large piece of undressed buffiUo skin (hung 
from the top and so placed as to be opened or closed, at pleasure, upon the 
ingress or egress of the inmate) furnishes the simple substitute for a 
door. 

These lodges (some of them containing quantities of roofiif^e to the 
amount of ten or fifteen buffido skins) are Mrge and commodious; and, 
even comfortable, in the severest weather ; the heat from the centre fire, 
being refracted on striking the sloping sides, communicates an agreeable 
warmth to every part. 

An Indian lod^, in the summer, is admirably adapted to the pleasure of 
its occupants,— 4)y raising the lower extremeties of the envelope and 
securing them at a proper elevation, a free passage of air is obtained, 
which neatly contributes to increase the merits of the deUghtful shade 
af&rdea by tlie superstructure. 

A lodge of the largest size may easilv be made to accommodate fifteen 
persons. The interior is arranged bv placing the fixtures for sleeping tft 
the circumference of the circle, which afK)rd seats to the inmates, and Uius 
a sufilicient space is left vacailt between them and the centre fire. 

This kind of dwelling is the one almost universally adopted by the 
mountain and prairie Indians, and is, perhaps, better suited to their con- 
diticm and mode of life than any other that could be devised. 

Dependent solely upon the chase for a subsistence, the various Indian 
tribes inhabiting the mountains and countries adjacent can occupy no 
fixed residences. Contrary to the habits of more eastern nations, among 
whom agriculture commands attention to a greater or less extent, they are 
continu£dly necessitated to rove from place to place in pursuit of game. 

Give to on<^ of them a bow, arrows, knife, lodge, and running horse, and 
he is rich, happy and contented. When the erratic propensities of the 
bttffido (upon which is his almost exclusive dependence) compel him to 
change his l()cation, he has only to pull down his lodge, saddle his horse, 
and away. 

So accustomed are they to this incessant rambling, they reff&ni it more 
aa a pleasure than an inconvenience. I have frequently seen nundreds of 
&milies moving together, — presenting to the unsophisticated beholder a 
novel and amusing spectacle, — with their horses, mules, dogs, men, 
squaws, children, and all the paraphernalia of savage domestic economy, 
and the rude accoutrements of peace and war, commingled indiscrimi- 
nately. 

The Sioux tribe, to whose country we have now introduced the reader, 
18, perhaps, the largest Indian nation upon the continent of North America, 
with the exception of the ancient Mexicans, if indeed they may be called 
Indians. This tribe occupies a territory extending from the St. Peters, 
of the Mississippi, to the Missouri, and from thence to the forks of the 
Platte, and up that river to its head- waters. They are supposed to num- 
ber not far from eighty thousand men, women, and children, and are divided 
into many fractional parts, each bearing its own name, yet speaking the 
same language and claiming a common nationality. 

Of these divisions are the Bruks, Oglallas, Yanktaus, Piankshaws, 

9 



96 DRUNKEN INDIANS. 

Minecabiais, Blackfeet, Broken-arrows, and Assenaboins, with many odi- 
ers whose names have escaped my recollection. The only perceptible 
diflerence in language, is, in the pronnciation of words like the foUowinff, 
meallOi appeUo and LacotOi—thcee upon the Mississippi, and some m 
the vicinity of the Missouri, pronouncing them meaddo, appeddOf and Dth 

COtiOm 

The members of this nation, so far as my observation extends, toe a 
cowardly, treacherous, thieving eet, taken as a body — and are well deserving 
the appellation of mean and contemptible ; though there are some hon- 
orable exceptions to the remark. 

Any eflS)rt to civilize them must necessarily prove tedious, if not alto- 

S^ther impracticable, while they adhere to their present roving habits ;— > 
ough three several miseionaiy stations have been recently established 
among them, with sliest success ; viz : at St Peters, Lac qui Parle, and 
Traverse des Sioux. But the Indians of those sections, being under the 
more direct influence of the U. S. Government, have begun to ahandiw 
their former wandering habits, and betake themselves to agricultural poi^ 
suits. 

The term Sinox, as applied to this nation, is of Franco-Canadian ori- 
gin — being a corruption of the word sued^ and means drunk or drunken,-^ 
allusion to their excessive fondness for liquor and predilection to inebri- 
acy. The name by which they call themselves, and are known amcHig 
other tribes, is LacotOj or CtU'Uiroats, — for such is the literal meaning of 
the term ; and rarelv, indeed, were ever a pack of scoundrels more j^y 
entitled to the appellation. 

The night of our arrival at Fort Platte was the signal for a grand jollifi- 
cation to all hands, (with two or three exceptions,) who soon got most 
gloriously drunk, and such an illustration of the beauties of harmony as 
was then perpetrated, would have rivalled Bedlam itself, or even the &mous 
rouncil chamoer beyond the Styx. 

Yelling, screeching, firing, shouting, fighting, swearing, drinking, and 
such like tnteres/tT^ performances, were kept up without intermission^ — 
and woe to the poor fellow who looked for repose that night, — ^he might as 
well have thought of sleeping with a thousand cannon bellowing at his 
ears. 

The scene was prolonged till near sundown the next day, and several 
made their egress from this beastly carousal, minus shirts and coats, — ^with 
swollen eyes, bloody noses, and empty pockets, — the latter circumstance 
will be easily understood upon the mere mention of the fact, that liquor, in 
this country, is sold for four dollars per pint 

The day following was ushered m by the enactment of another scene 
of comico-tragical character. 

The Indians encamped in the vicinity, being extremely solicitous to imi* 
tate the example of their ^ illustrious predecessors," soon as the first tints 
of morning began to paint the east, commenced their demands for fire- 
water ; and, ere the sun had told an hour of his course, diey were pretty 
well advanced in the state of '* how came ye so," and seemed to exercise 
their musical powers in wonderful rivalry with their white brethren. 

Men, women, and children were seen running from lodge to lodge with 



• •• • 



• * 
• • 

• •• 



• • • 



AN INDIAN FUNERAL. •'- ,-.M4 

VMaela of liqaor, inyiting their friends and relatives to drink ; whfle 
wboopinff, singing, drunkenness, and trading for fresh supplies to admuH 
ister to ue deouuids of intosdcation, had evidently become the order of 
the day. Soon, individuals were noticed passing from one to another, with 
months f all of tbe coveted fire-water, dnwing the lips of fiivored friends 
in close contact, as if to kiss, and ejecting tte contents of their own into 
the ea^r months of otherB^--4hns affording the delisted recipients tests 
of their fervent esteem in the heat and strragth of tlw strange draught 

At this sta^e of thfl^game the American Fur Company, as is charged, 
commenced ifealing out to them, gratuitousb^, strong drugged liquor, for 
the double purpose of preventing a sale of the article by its competitor in 
in trade, and of creating sickness, or inciting contention among the Indians, 
while under the influence of sudden intoxication,— hoping thereby to 
induce the latter to charge its ill effects upon an opposite source, and uius, 
by destrojring ihe credit of its rival, monopolize for itself the whole trade. 

It is hard to predict, with certainty, wbett would have been the result of 
this reckless poticy, had it been continued throufl^ the day. Already its 
effects became apparent, and small knots of drunken Indians were seen in 
various directions, quarrelling, preparing to fight, <»r fighting, — while others 
lay stretched upon the ground in heiress impotenc^, or staggered from 
place to place with all the revolting attendencies of mtoxication. 

The dram^ however, was here brought to a temporary close by an inci- 
dent which made a strange contrast in ite immediate results. 

One of the h^id chiefs of the Brul^ village, in riding at full speed from 
Fort John to Fort Platte, being a little too drunk to navigate, plunged 
headlong from his horse and Invke his neck when within a few rods of bis 
destination. Then was a touchii^ display of confusion and excitement 
Men and squaws commenced bawling like children; — the whites were bad, 
very bad, said they, in their grief, to give Susu-ceicha the fire-water that 
caused bis death. But the hei^t of their censure was directed against 
the American Fur Company, as its liquor had done the deed. 

The body of the deceased chief was brought to the Fort, by his rela- 
tives, with a request that the whites should assist at its burial ; but they 
wore in a sorry plight for such a service. There, however, were found 
sufficiently sober for the task, and accordingly commenced operations. 

A scaflS>ld was soon erected for the reception of the body, whichi in 
the mean time, had been fitted for ite last airy tenement This duty 
was performed by the relatives of the deceased in the fol/owing manner : 
it was first washed, then arrayed in the habiliraeote last worn by Susn- 
ceicha during life, and sewed in several envelopes of lodgOrskin, with the 
bow, arrows, and pipe once claiming him as their owner. This done, all 
things were ready for the proposed burial. 

The corpse was then lM>me to its final resting place, toUowed by a 
throng of relatives and friends. While moving onward with the dead, 
the train of mourners filled the air with their lamentations and rehearsaLi 
of the virtues and meritorious deeds of their late chief. 

Arrived at the scafiTold, the corpse was carefully reposed open it faeiQg 
the east, while beneath ite head was placed a small sack of meat, tobacco 
and vermilion, with a comb, looking*glass, and knife, and at ite feet, a 
small banner that had been carried in the procession* A covering of 

9* 



W .SPEJEPH OF LONG BOW ON THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER. 

»-■ w *- 

•duplet cloth was then spread over it, and the body firmly iairiied *4> ili 
place by long strips uf raw hide. This done, the horse of the chiet'Uta 
was produced as a sacrifice for the benefit of his master in his iaag 
journey to the celestial hunting ground* 

The above mode of sepulture is that commonly practised by the noon- 
tain tribes. It is seldom indeed they ever dispose of their dead in aof 
other way than by placing them either upon scaffolds, branches of tr e e o» 
or in some elevated position, not onfrequently covered by lodges, whem 
they are left to moulder and waste in the winds ax>d rain, till the bones 
falling one by one upon the prairie, are gathered up by surviving friends, 
and finally entombed in mother earth. 

The corpse of the ili-fated man being thus securely fixed in the siry 
couch assigned it, to await the speedy process of dissolution, and mingle 
with its kindred earth, that its bones might find their proper places be* 
neath the prairie 6od, the village once acknowledging him as its head 
new met round the BcafiS>ld, men. women, children, and little ones, to 
bewail the sad fate that had bereaved them of their loved chieftain. 

First, encircling it at a respectful distance, were seated the old aaen, 
next the young men and warriors, and next the squaws and childien. 
Etespa-huska, (Long Bow,) eldest son of the deceased, thereupon con* 
menced speaking, while the weeping throng ceased its tumult to listen to 
hii words : 

** Oh, Su8U"ceicha ! thy son bemoums thee, even as was wont the 
fledgelings of the war-eagle to cry for the one that nourished them, 
eieyet thy swift arrow had laid him in dust Sorrow fills the heart 
of Eftespa-huska.; sadness crushes it to the ground and sinks it beneath 
the sod upon which he treads. 

''Thou hast gone, oh Susu-ceicha! Death hath conquered theOf 
whom none but death could conquer ; and who shall now teach thy son 
to be brave as thou was brave ; to be good as thou wast good ; to fight 
the foe of thy people and acquaint thy chosen ones with the war-song of 
triumph ! to deck his lodge with the scalps of the slain, and bid the leet 
of the young move swiftly in the dance ? And who shall teach Etespa-hns- 
ka to follow the chase and plunge his arrows into the yielding sides of 
the tired bull 1 Who shall teach him to call for his prey from the deer, 
the elk, and the antelope, as thou hast done, or win honors from the 
slaughtered bear 1 

'' None. Etespa-huska has no teacher. He is alone. Susu-ceicha is 
dead! 

" But thou wilt soon gain the happy country. Thy journey is short 
There wilt thou bestride the fieet horses that never tire, and roam amid 
the fruits and flowers, the sweet waters and pleasure-groves of that lovely 
clime ; for thou art worthy. 

"And, oh, Wakantunga ! (Great Spirit,) do thou pity Etespa-huska. 
Do thou teach him to be brave and good like his father, for who is there 
to pity or teach him now he is left alone !" 

Then, turning to the audience he continued : 

'* Brothers : Strong was the arm of Susu-ceicha, and fleet was the arrow 
shot from his bow. Thirty and five of the enemy hath he slain in battle^ 
whose waving locks were the trophies that ofttimes measured the quick 



THE COA8T CLEAB. 108 

fltep of the scalp-dance. Foorscore and ten vjere the medicine-dogs be 
krooght from the ]and of the foeman, that their shrill neighings mig^ 
greet the ears, and their strong backs carry the people he loved; for 
brave was the heart of Susu-ceicha ! 

''What warrior ever came to his lodge and went hungry, or naked, or 
Medy away ? What widow or orphan of his people blessed not their 
chief, when he returned from the chase and apportioned to them their 
wonted dues irom the choice spoils of the buffalo 1 for generous was the 
son] of Susu^eicha. 

''Brothers : Susu-ceicha is dead. No more shall his voice be beard 
in your councils, or his courage lead you to victory, or his generosity 
lejoice the hearts of the needy, the widow, and the orphan. Etespa« 
buska laments a father and a teacher. The Burnt-thighs* a mighty 
chieftain ; and the nation its bravest warrior ! We all mourn him ; sor* 
low fills the hearts, and tears wash the cheeks of his people. It is good 
that we bemourn him, and mingle with the winds the voices of our uun* 
eotation, for who shall now stand in the place of Susu-ceicha. 

" Brothers : Jjet us stamp his memory upon our hearts and imitate hie 
virtues, that our acts may rear to him a living monument, which may 
endure till time itself shall die !" 

No sooner had the orator ceased, than a tremendous howl of grief buret 
from the whole assemblage, men, women, and children, which was re- 
newed in quick succession for several hours, when finally the bewailing 
multitude retired to their lodges. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Coast dear, and Trade opened. — ^Moie visitori. — Smoking ont the natives. — ^Inci- 
dent illustrative of Indian character. — Expeditions for trade. — ^Black HiJls. — ^Raw- 
hide. — An Indian and a buffiilo chase. — Deep snow, extreme cold, and painftd 
journey. — L*ean-qui-court. — Remarks. — Lost— White river; its vaUey, fruits, and 
game. — Building site.— The Devil's Tea-pot— Troubles with Indians. — ^Theft and 
its punishment — ^Indian soldiers. — Christmas extras. — Outrageous conduct— Ras- 
cality of traders.— " That Old Serpent"— Indian superstition, religious tenets 
and practices. — Nodcms upon general morality. 

The events of the day had for the present put an eflectual stop to dissi- 
pation among the Indians, and not long afterwards they began to pull down 
their lodges and remove to the neghborhood of buflyo, for the purpose of 
selecting winter-quarters. 

• The disgusting scenes connected with our arrival at the Fort had pretty 
much ceased on the evening of the second day, and everythingi with a few 
exceptions, began to assume its wonted aspect 

•This 18 the interpretation of the Indian name which the French have supplied 
by the word Biul^. 



104 EXPEDITION TO WHITE HTVfJL 

The winter trade was now considered fully opened. Parties were sent 
with goods from the Fort to diflerent villages, ror the purpose of baiter, 
and aSyrs began to show a bnsiness-like appearance. * 

Some two weeks subsequently, a band of Brules arrived in the vicinhy. 
They had come for a drunken spree, and soon opened a brisk trade in 
liquor. 

Our visitors crowded the Fort houses in quest of articles of plunder^ 
and became an incessant source of annoyance to the engages. One room, 
in particular, was thronged almost to the exclusion ot its regular occu- 
pants. The latter, losing all patience, at length hit upon a plan to rid 
themselves of the intruders. 

After closely coverin|r the chimney funnel, by aid of some half rotten 
chips a smoke was raised ; the doors and windows being closed to prevent its 
egress. lu an instant the apartment became filled to sufSx^ation, — quite 
too much so for the enduraiice of the wondering savages, who gladly with- 
drew to gain the pure air of the exterior. On oeing told it was the Long- 
knife's medicine,* they replied : 

*^Ugh! WakeasutiellohaMena-huskatour!" (Ugh! The Long-knife's 
medicine is strong /) 

During their stay at the Fort, an incident occurred which will serve to 
illustrate a singular trait in the character of these Indians. 

A brave, named Bello-tunga, (Big Eagle,) received a blow over the head 
from a half crazed drunken trader, which came very near terminating in 
serious consequences. What would have been the result, it is hard to tell, 
had not the whites promptly interfered, and, with much efibrt, succeeded in 
pacifying the enraged savage by presenting him a horse. 

At first he would admit of no compromise short of the ofiender's blood — 
he had been struck by the pale-face, and blood must atone for the aggres- 
sion, — unless that should wipe out the disgrace, he could never again lilt 
up his head amonghis people, — ^they would call him a coward, and say the 
white man struck Bello^unga and he dared not to resent it 

The services of his father, hereupon, were secured in behalf of the 
ofiending party, which, after great ado, finally efiected an adjustment of 
the difficulty. 

An Indian considers it the greatest indignity to receive a blow from any 
one, even from his own brother ; — and, unless the afl^r is settled by the 
bestowment of a trespass offering on the part of the aggressor, he is almost 
sure to seek revenge, eitlier through blood or the destruction of property. 
This is a more especial characteristic of the Sioux than of any other nation. 
In fact, the Snakes, Crows, Arapahos, Chyennes, and most other tribes are 
&r less nice in its observance^--though lul regard the like an insult diat 
justly calls for revenge. 

S£fon after, an expedition was detached to Fort Lancaster, on the South 
Fork Platte, and another to White river, an affluent of the Missouri, some 

* This word, in Indian signification, means any person or ttdng possessed of exti*- 
ordinary or supernatural powers, as well as any act for conciliating the favor and 
obtaining the assistance of the Great Spirit. Th«U medicine is the strongest ^^hich is 
Ihe most efficient for its inten4ed purposes. 



A PROBLEM IN MORAUIY. 105 

eighty miles northwest of the main trading post The kttar party included 
myself with its number. 

'Our purpose was to build houses in the vicinity of White river, and thus 
secure the trade of several villages of Brulee that had selected their winter 
quarters in the neighborhood, am were anxiously awaiting our arrival. 

On the last of November we were under way with two carts freighted 
with goods and liquor, accompanied by only six whites, one negro, and an 
Indian. 

Crossing the Platte opposite the Fort, we continued our course, west 
by north, over a broken and tumulous prairie, occasionally diversified by 
thick clusters of pines and furrowed by deep ravines, and abounding in 
diminutive valleys, whose tall, withered grass ^ve evidence of the rich 
soil producing it. To our left the hiffh, frowmng summits of the Bkck 
Hills began to show themselves in the long distance, like dark clouds, and 
planted tiieir dense pine forests upon the broken ridges whose irregular 
courses invaded the cheerless prairie fiir eastward. 

A ride of twenty miles brought us to Rawhide, where we passed the 
following night and day. 

This creek traces its course over a broad sandy bed, through a wide valley 
of rich clayey loam, slightly timbered and luxuriant in grasses. Towards 
its head, it is shut in upon both sides by high pine hills; but, in passing on, 
these mural confines are exchanged for the prairies, aind the creek finaUy 
debouches into the Platte. 

An abundance of prelee and rushes afbrded fine pasturage to our animals, 
and a kindly g^ve of dry cottonwood gave us requisite fuel for camp-fire. 

Before leaving, we were joined by another Indian mounted upon a dark 
bay horse, tiie noblest animal of its kind I remember to have seen among 
the mountain tribes. It had been stolen from the Snakes during the past 
summer, as its present owner informed us, and he seemed not a little proud 
of the admiration we bestowed upon it. 

The new comer proved Arketchetarwaka, (Medicine Sddier,) a brother 
of BeUo-tunga, the brave referred to on a former occasion. Seating him- 
self by the fire, he looked dejected and melancholy, and his face bore inr 
dubitable evidence of a personal encounter with some one. 

On enquiring the cause of this, we learned that he had left his fiither's 
kxbe by reason of a quarrel he had had with his eUest brother, — the latter 
having struck him with a fire-brand and burnt his body in several places 
during a drunken spree,— he was now on his way to A^ite river, there to 
await the suitable time for revenge, when he should kill his brother. 

We told him this would not be right ; — ^it was liquor that had done him 
the wrong, and not his brother }•— liquor was bad ! 

He seemed to acknowledge the truth of our suggestions, and asked ** whv 
the pale-faces brought the fire-water to do the red man so much harm ?" 
Our trader replied, ** The whites want robes, and can get them for liquor 
when noHiing else will do it" 

The answer evidently perplexed him, while he sat gazing silently into 
the fire, with his arms akimbo upon his knees, and p^ns supportinff his 
chin, as if striving to work out to his own satisfacticm this strange proUem 
in morality . 



106 PAINFUL TRAVELLINGr. 

The tliiid day we resumed our course, and, after a drive of six or eigh 
miles, (^me upon a large band of buHalo. Here, at our request, the Med 
icine Soldier dofled his robe, slung his anow-case over his naked slioulders, 
mounted his horse bow in hand, and started for the chase. 

At first he rode slowly, as if reserving the speed of his charger till the 
proper time. The buffido permitted him to approach within a few hundred 
yards before thev commenced flight Then was a magnificent spectacle. 

The afliighted beasts flew over the ground with all tlie speed that extreme 
terror lent to their straightened nerves, and plied their nimble feet with a 
velocity almost incredible — ^but they were no match for the noble steed the 
Indian bestrode. He was among them in a trice, and horse, Indian, and 
bufl&lo were lost in identitv, as they swept over a snow-clad prairie, in 
one thick, black mass, like the career of a fierce tornado, tossing the loose 
drifts upwards in small particles, that, in their descent, pictured white clouds 
ftJIing to the earth, ever and anon enshrouding the whole band from view. 

Now their course is turned and makes directly towards us. They pass, 
all foaming with sweat — ^with lolling tongues and panting breath---but 
they still seem loath to abate from the energy of their wild terror. 

Soon the Indian and his gallant steed part from them. He has selected 
the choicest of the band and pursues her singly. Side by side both cow 
and horse keep even pace, while the ready archer pours in his arrows,—- 
some of them, forcing their entire way tlirough the bleeding beast, fall 
loosely to the ground upon the opposite side. 

At length, spent by the toilsome flight, exhausted by loss of blood, and 
pierced through her vitals by the practised marksman that follows her, she 
halts for fight. 

Now, she plunges with mad fury at the horse, — ^the well-trained steed 
clears the force of her charge at a bound. Again, she halts, — the blood 
spouts from her nostrils and mouth — she staggers. Again, she musters her 
expiring energies for one more desperate onset at her enemy, as if deter- 
mined, if die she must, not to die unavenged. Her charge proves futile as 
the former. A deathnsickness comes over her. Her life is fast ebbing from 
within her. She reels,— she totters— she falls, — and breathes her life 
away upon the blood-dyed snow. 

A few moments' delay put us in possession of an ample supply of fresh 
meat, — ^the Indian reserving the robe only as his share. The cow proved 
a most excellent selection, and did honor to the judgment of the hunter. 

As we travelled on, the snow, which scarcely an hour since had first 
attracted our attention, became deeper and deeper, and our progress more 
tedious and difficult 

From bare ground and comparatively moderate climate, we were fully . 
inducted to tlie region of snow, ice, and winter. The prairie was high and 
undulating. To our left an immense wall of secondary rock surmounted 
a ridge of naked hills, that described in its course the curve of a rainbow, 
enclosing upon three sides a large valley facing the east, — thence, stretch- 
ing westward and raising higher and higher, hastened to mingle its heads 
aniimg the cloud-capped summits and snows of the neighboring moun- 
tains. 

From a light coating of loose snow our course soon became obstructed 



» te «• * 



fc b b 

» * 



*•* 



V * 

. « b b to 

V •* b 

^ 3 *. b» W I. 



. L'EAU-QUI-COURT.— REMARKS. 109 

bj Still deepening layers, covered with a thick crust, scarcely strong enough 
to bear our wei^t, bat quite sufficient to wrench wad jar us at cveiy step^ 
and make our advance threefold tiresome. 

The cold was so intense, we were forced to walk to keep from freezing. 
Our difficulties thickened the fiuther we progressed. Night closed in upon 
U6, and we could no ioDger distinguish our course, l^t we kept on, in 
hopes of reaching some creek or spring where we might await the coming 
day. 

Slowly, onward, — plunge, plunge, at every step ; — ^now prostrate at full 
Jen^ upon the hard crust, and then agam sUggering in resistless mimicry 
of drunken men. 

The chill winds sweeping over the dreary expanse pierced us tlirough at 
each whifi^ and seemed to penetrate every nerve, and joint, and muscle, as 
if to transform our hearts' blood into icicles. But still it was plunge, plunge 
along ; onward, plunge, fall ; but yet onward! There is no stopping place 
here, — *tis push on or die ! 

Thus, travelling for three or four hours, not knowing whither, we came 
finally to the leeward of a high hill. The agreeable change produced by 
the absence of wind, called forth a hearty response. ^ Uamp, ho," was 
echoed upon all sides. But here was no water for ourselves or our animals. 
We must yet go on. Still we lingered — ^loath to leave the &vored spot. 
The Indian, who had been absent lor a brief space, now came up, shout- 
ing: 

"Mine, washtasta !" (Water, very good !) 

*• Tarkoo mine ?" asked the trader. (What water ?) 

" Mine-loosa. Tunga warkpollo." (Running-water. A lar^e creek.) 

It proved L*eau-qui-court, the stream upon which we had intended to pass 
the ni^ht 

Pushing on, a few moments brought us to its banks, in a deep valley 
covered with snow. A fire was then promptly built from a small quanti^ 
of wood we had the precaution to take with us from Rawhide, and aQ 
hands were soon as c mibrtably conditioned as circumstances would admit. 

A hearty supper served to appease the appetites so keenly sharpened by 
a toilsome journey of thirty miles, occupying from sunrise till ten o'clock 
at night This over, each one cleared for himself a place upon the frozen 
ground, and, spreading down his bed) quickly forgot his cares and su^rings 
m the welcome embrace of sleep. 

L'eau-qui-court, or Running. water, heads in a small lake under the base 
of the first range of Black Hius, and, following an eastemly course, empties 
into the Missouri, about one hundred and fifty or two hundred miles above 
Council Blufif. It derives its name from the rapidity of its current, which 
rolls over a pebbly bed with great velocity. 

At this place it is narrow and deep, with steep banks, and not a stick of 
timber is to be found on it, above or below, for twenty miles. At the lake 
where it heads, there is an abundance of timber ; large groves of cotton- 
wood are also found at some distance below our present camp. 

The intermediate country, from Rawhide, is a cold and cheerless expanse 
almost at all seasons of the year. From the commencement of fall to the 
very close of spring, it is subject to frost and snow; — ^for what causs^ 

^0 



110 WHITB RIVER SCENERY. 

it is hard to conjecture. Its sar&ce, though quite elevated, is not 
sufficientiy so to make such marked difference in climate between it aad 
adjoining sections. 

The next day proved cloudy; we, however, resumed our course which 
led over a rough, tumulous country, covered with snow and darkened by 
occasional clusters of pines. 

Early in the morning our Indians left us and took a nearer route to the 
village. Soon after we became bewildered in |iie obscurity of the atmos- 
phere, and travelled till night unconscious whether right or wrong. 
Finally, coming to a deep ravine that obstructed further progress, we tamed 
to a neighboring grove of pines, at the point of an eminence, and made 
camp. It was a bleak airy place, but by aid of a huge iire of dry pine 
we were quite comfortable, despite a heavy fall of snow during the night 

With the morning our perplexities were renewed. Directly in front lay 
a broad and impassable ravine, beyond which a high mountain range arose 
to view. Should we go up or down? After much debate wc decided 
upon the latter, and, bearing northward during the day, struck the head 
of a stream which subsequently proved White river. 

This stream traces its way through a broad valley, enclosed upon either 
side by high pine hills. Its banks are studded with thick groves of cotton- 
wood, elm, ash, box-elder, and willow, — with nearly all the varieties of 
fruit-bearing shrubs and trees indigenous to the mountains. In the item 
of plums and cherries, it gave evidence of exuberant fecundity. The 
bnsnes, in many instances, yet bore the dried relics of their burthen, 
as if to tempt the beholder's taste,>*while the tall grass and rosebuds,* 
every where attested tlie summer-verdure and beauty of the valley in 
which they grew. 

The snow that had hitherto impeded our progress, now gradually became 
less as we advanced down the valley, and soon gave place to bare ground. 
Game appeared in great numbers, attracted from the adjoining hills to pass 
the winter in this inviting locality. 

A journey of two days brought us to the site selected for houses, and, 
consequently to a halt, for the present* 

The place was surrounded by wild and romantic scenery. Directly in 
front, upon the opposite side of the creek, arose a perpendiculaT wall of 
marl and half formed sandstofie, towering, stratum above stratum, to a 
height of three or four hundred feet, and overlooking the valley above and 
below, — ^while further on, a steep hill-side, covered with tall, straight, and 
almost branchless pines, burst upon the view. 

Rearward a gradual acclivity led to a high plateau, some two miles 
broad, coated with long, taU grass, when a ridge of abrupt pine hills in- 
troduced the more distant mountains, with their rugged sides and frowning 
summits, — and, higher up, an immense pile of earthy limetitone, sur- 

*Rosebuds are found in great quantities in many places, throughout the mountains, 
during tHb winter, and attain a large size. They are highly esteemed by many «« 
an anicle of food, and have not unfrequently been the means of preserving liie in cases 
af extreme hunger and lack of other eatables. 



A THIEF PUNISHED. Ill 



^^'^*^^*^*^^^^^^^^^^^*^^^^>^>A^>^>^<^>^<^^^'^'^'^'^'W^MMMWWWMWMMMWM^^WM%^*MMAAMMMM 



moonting a wing of hills as it approached the river, presented a medley of 
carious and fantastic shapes,-— objects alike of amusement and wonder. 

One of the latter, denominated the ** Devil's Tea-pot,*' exhibited exter- 
nally an ahnost perfect facsimile of that kind of vessel. It was of gigantic 
proportions^ — being one hundred feet high, and, occupying a conspicuous 
position, may be seen for a distance of many miles. 

The Indians from a near village, immediately upon our arrival, came 
flocking around for the threefold purpose of begging, trading and stealiDjg ; 
and, from this forward, we rarely experienced an interval free from their 
anoyance. 

Prompt arrangements were here comnrienced for building a store room 
and trading house;— but meanwhile, wo were forced to keep strict guard 
both night and day. 

Two braves were secured to *< act soldier," and assist in keeping the 
thieving propensities of their people in check. Yet, notwithstanding the 
united vigilance of all hands, the latter would frequently perpetrate their 
petit larcenies under our very eyes, without being detected in the act,— 
so adroit were they at the business. An instance of Uiis kind happening to 
myself is perhaps worth relating. 

Previously to the erection of houses, we were necessitated to sleep in the 
open air. Wearied by the lateness of the hour, one night I spread down 
my couch by the camp-fire, with the intention of retiring. The weather 
being very cold, I had scarcely turned to warm myself, when a backward 
glance revealed the sudden disappearance of my sleeping appendages- 
robes blankets and all ! 

Informing the trader of my mishap, and catching a glimpse of the thief 
as he dodg^ past a knot of Indians at the further extremity of the camp, gun 
in hand, T started after the nimble lark ; but the thick bushes and darkness 
soon shut him from view and left me in fruitless pursuit 

At length, relinquishing the hope of ever regsiininff the stolen articles, 
and vexed at the impious savage, who, instead of obeymg the Scripture in- 
junction of ^ take up thy bed and toalky" had snatched mt bed and kun ! I 
returned to camp. Here I was shown a robe, by the trader, that had been 
brought in scarcely a minute before and ofi^red in barter for liquor ; — ^it 
was one of the two I had lost 

The bearer was now promply charged as being accessory to the theft. 
This he stoutly denied, alleging that the robe had been given him by an- 
other Indian for the purpose he had ofiered it. 

Upon this the af&ir was referred to our soldiers, who, after much parley- 
ing and no little threatening, succeeded in causing him to return the mis- 
sing articles. The fellow then demanded of me a cup of liquor as pay for 
bringing them back. Mustering to my aid a few woias of Sioux, I replied : 
** Mea warche yau wechacha ceicha, opata-ne ha warktash-ne coga ! — ^I 
neither like bad men, nor will I pay for doing bad." 

Marto-nazher, (Standing Bear,) one of our soldiers, on hearing my an- 
swer, arose and addressed the crowd in an earnest and impressive manner. 
He was grieved on account of the many depredations continually commit* 
ted by his people upon the property of the whites. It is wrong — ^veiy 
wrong, said he, to conduct in this manner; — ^if such wickedness is allow- 



112 INDIAN SOLDIERS. 

ed, the whites will ahandon the country. Whites do not steal from us.— 
Something must be done — an example must be had — ^the perpetrators 
of tliese outrages must be punished. 

*' You, Schena-sarpah," he continued, throwing his piercing glance full 
apon the chop-fallen culprit, who hung his head tor shaine at being caught 
in a manner so little to his credit, ** Aye, you JScena-sarpah do carry a 
bow and arrows ; you call yourself a brave ; and yet you steal from our 
friends, the pale-faces ! 

"Do brave men steal from their friends? No! Schena^sarpah should 
alone steal from his enemies, if he be a brave man and a soldier. 

" Who are they that steal from their friends ? Squaws and children, as 
Schena-sarpah well knows. Then he is no better than they ! Why 
should he carry a bow ? Why go to war, or follow the chase ? Squaws 
and children do neither. None, out brave men go to war — none hut they 
should follow the chase. 

" Schena-sarpa needs no bow. Let him go to his lodge. There let himi 
make robes and moccasins for braves, and take care of children with 
squaws, — for such should be his occupation, and only such should be his 
companions !" 

So saying, be approached the unresisting thief, and, taking from him his 
bow, arrows, and panther-skin quiver, resumed his seat. Then, breaking 
the arrows and shooting them away, one by one, among the trees, he snap- 
ped the bow across his knee and threw it into the fire. The bright flame 
irom the burning bow had barely died away, when tlie quiver was consign^ 
ed to the same late. As the last fragments of the effeminate's weapons 
mouldered to ashes, a smile of satisfaction played upon the countenance of 
the Standing Bear, at the thought of having avenged the wrongs of the 
white man. 

And, truly, this was an infliction of summary punishment. The amount 
of property destroyed exceeded the value of a horse, and, in the estimation 
of an Indian, constitutes a man's chief wealth. The odender was thus 
not only left disarmed by the operation, but made poor, and reduced to a 
level with the squaws and children to whom he was set apart He be- 
moaned his loss most piteonsly, and started for his lodge, bellowing like a 
motherless calf. 

Another instance of theft occurred soon after, almost as remarkable. A 
robe was stolen from off one of our party, while he was asleep, and barter- 
ed for whiskey, without his knowing it i 

Our Indian soldiers were of great service in conducting the trade. If 
any difficulty occurred, they were idways at hand to assist in its adjustment, 
and preserve order and quiet so fiEir as lay in their power. If any visitor 
became troublesome, they at once ordered him to his lodge, and enforced 
tiheir commands in case of resistance. 

Every trader is necessitated to employ one or more braves to assist him 
in his business at the villages. An Indian considers it a great honor thus 
lo receive the confidence oj a white man and " act soldier " for him, as he 
terminates it Some of them have not unfrequently gone so far as to 
iSli tbeoae of their people who proved guilty of misusing; the traders by 
whom they were employed. 



OUTRAGEOUS CONDUCT. 118 

They exercise a kind of supervisory office in the manaeemeiit of alBuii 
which coald not well be dipensed with, — and very often have the lives of 
traders been preserved by the judgment and discretion of these men. 

Dec, 25th. Christmas finds ns in our new residence, which, with the ex* 
ception of a chimney, is now completed. 

This great annual festival is observed with all the exhilarating hilarity 
tod good cheer that circumstances w;ill allow. Several little extras for 
the occasion have been procured from the Indians, which prove quite whole- 
some and pieasant-tasted. One of these, called washena, consists of 
dried meat pulverized and mixed with marrow ; another is a preparation 
of cherries, preserved when first picked by pounding and sun-drying them, 
(they are served by mixing them with houiUie, or the liquor of fresh-boiled 
meat, thus giving to it an agreeable winish taste ;) a third is marrow-fat, 
an article in many respects superior to butter ; and, lastly, we obtained a 
kind of flour made from the pomme blanc^ (white apple,) answering very 
well as a substitute for that of grain. 

The above assortment, with a small supply of sugar and coflee, as well as 
several other dainties variously prepared, afl&rds an excellent dinner,^and» 
though difierent in kind, by no means inferior in quality to the ^neralit) 
of dinners for which the day is noted in more civilized communities. 

The day following oar turbulent neighbors were augmented in num- 
ber by the accession of another village of firules, and Marto-cogershne, of 
whom I have spoken upon a former occasion, became with his fiunily our 
constant annoyance. 

Visiting us at one time, squaws and all— 4i8 was his dafly custom— to 
beg liquor, (which, some way or other, he always obtained,) the brother of 
our tormentor demanded a quantity of that article to take with him to his 
lodge. This, after many sharp words, was offered; but, having no vessel 
for its conveyance, he extended his demands to a kettle, — ^which, of course, 
was refused ; whereupon he threatened vengeance unless both were forth- 
coming upon the mocosco,* (prairie,) and required still fiuther the gift of 
a pair of nnoccasins. 

Our trader replied, ^ The liquor is for yon, and here are the moccasins, 
(pulling oflf his own and passing them to him,) but the kettle you cannot 
have." 

The afi&ir thus ended for the present, and the modest beggar retired to 
his lodge. The next morning, however, two of our horses were found 
pierced with arrows, and so bsuily, that they died soon after. 

At another time, Marto-cogershne became so enraged &t being refused a 
whole keg of liquor " on the prairie," he rushed upon the trader with his 
butcher-knife to kill him. What would have been the result, it is hard to 
tell, had I not stayed the descending weapon by seizing the fellow's arm. 
Heife our soldiers interfered and put him out of the house^— closing the 
doo/upon him. The exasperated savage then commenced shootutg upon 
us through the door ; — two Indian boys passing in the interval also furmsh- 

*'This expression implies the bestowment of anything as a free gift. It is also 
to denote a random way of speaking with regard to truth. 

10* 



114 INDIAN supERsrrnoNa 

ed marks for his gun, and not long subsequently a mule and an ox belon|^ 
ing to us fell to appease his insulted dignity. 

However, the chrf d^ouvre of his rascality was exhibited in stealing our 
whole cavallard,* consisting of ten head of horses and mules, whidi be 
drove into the mountains. We were compelled to give a quantity of liquor 
and ammunition, two blankets, and several other articles before we could 
secure their return. 

From the movement of things, he was evidently instigated by the Ameri- 
can Fur Company traders to £> us all the mischief in his power. Certain 
it is, he was their regular *' soldier," and received from them numerous 
presents in consideration of his good conduct 

The employees of this company are frequently guilty of such disgrace- 
ful conduct. In connection with this conclusion I might cite instance 
upon instance, and string out a volume of proof, were it necessary. 

Soon after Christmas we commenced erecting our chimney. The ma^ 
terials for it were procured from an adjoining bank. While engaged in 
quarrying them, the operator came to a crevice filled with a strange 
fleshy substance, coiled together like the folds of a huge rope. ^ Hallo !" 
3riea he, with astonishment, '* here's the Devil, himself!" 

The extraordmaiy announcement brought all hands to the spot to get a 
peep at '* Old Nick, and the Indians, also, witnessing the unusual conmio- 
don, came hurrying up to learn its cause. 

The result prov^, that, if not the Devil, it was his great prototype,— it 
was that " Old Serpent," with all his progeny. 

By means of a stick, ihirty^six large snakes were exposed to view, — 
some of them six feet in length. They were in a torpid state, the result 
of the severe cold of winter. 

Having drawn them out, one by one, it was proposed to treat them to a 
warm bath. Accordingly, after placing them in a hole for the purpose, a 
keetle of scalding water was thrown upon them. The vivifying effects of 
this unwonted application restored them to a sudden animation, when, 
wriggling and twisting for a few moments in all the contortions of agony, 
they at last tacitly curled up and expired. 

The Indians were much shocked on seeing this, and expressed their 
astonishment at our reckless presumption by their deeply accented " tula," 
—turning away from the spot with evident emotions of terror. 

On inquiring the cause, I learned in answer, that the various Indian 
tribes in the vicinity of the mountains are accustomed to regard the snake 
with a kind of superstitious veneration, and consider the act of killing it 
a sure harbinger of calamity. In the observance of this singuar 
notion, they are scrupulously exact; — ^but, in despite of repeated inquries, 
I have been unable to obtain the reasons upon which the whim is based. 

These tribes cherish many religious tenets, rites, and customs, — some 
general and others peculiar only to individuals. 

* This is a mountain phrase of Spanish origin, (cavellardo,} and means a (Mod of 
bomsormulM. 



THEOLOGICAL NOTIONS. 119 



■OXli^ «««MAM«WW«MMMMM«WW«Wh 



An Indian will never pronounce the name of the Bi^ Medicine, or GratC 
Spirit, other than in a reverential manner, nor upon tnval occasions. 

This bein^ is considered the Great Superintendent of all things, whoM 
power sustains the universe,— <»iusing day and night with the varyinff 
seasons, — making the grass to grow, the water to run, and the rains to fall, 
for the good of man and beast 

Some imagine He lives in the sun ; others, in the air ; others, in the 
ground ; and others in the immensity of His works. 

The animal or thing possessed of wonderful or extraordinary powers, 
such as their ignorance ascribes to be the attributes of the Supreme 
Being, they look upon as endowed with a greater or less share of His 
presence, and venerate it accordingly. Thus, the sun, fire, lightningi 
thunder, fountains of peculiar medicinal qualities, extraordinary localities, 
and various other things are alike objects of religious regard. 

Although their theological sentiments are generally the same, the man- 
ner of showing their respect for this Overrming Providence differs with 
different tribes, families, and even persons. For instance,— soifte tribes 
shave their heads in token of their submission to Him. Others mark 
themselves for His own by some peculiar manner of cutting their ears 
for the reception of ornaments; — while others bum their thighs, tattoo 
their breasts, scar their arms, or flatten the heads of in£Emts, for a like 
purpose. 

Tho instrument, with which such ceremonies are performed, is invariably 
thrown away. In case of cutting the ears of an infant, the gift bestowed 
upon the operator is regarded as indicative of its success during life ;— 
parents have been known to give as high as ten horses on like occasions* 

Some make indelible marks of a blue color upon their chins and fore- 
heads, — or the figures of lizards, snakes, arrows, or other objects upon 
their arms. 

Some show their reverence in the peculiar manner of receiving the pipe 
and passing it to another ;— others by certain ceremonies before smoking,— 
til as, pointing the pipe*stem to the zenith, tlien tov/ards the ground, Sien 
horizontally upon either side, as if saying, '' Oh thou, whose habitation is 
immensity, accept this as the willing tribute of homage from thy child." 

They will never allow a bone of any kind to be broken within their 
lodges, and express great consternation and alarm at such an occurrence. 
Some will not permit a stick of wood to be struck with a knife or other 
edged tool while burning, and others exhibit their devotion by some pe- 
cuharity in the structure of their lodges, or the mode of placing their 
medicine-ba^, the length and shape of their arrows, their fashion of hair- 
dressing, and various minutise of like character. 

Others again will never eat unless they bestow the first mouthful as 
an offering to the prairie, — believing that, as the prairie afibrds water, 
grass, and game, for the good of the red man, it is the fullest cmbodyment 
of the Essence of Good ; therefore, in the observance of this practice, they 
not only acknowledge their faith in the existence of the Great Spirit, but 
set apart the first of their substance as test of their piety. 

Their ideas of the existence of a principle, or being, wno is the author 
and prompter of evil, are crude and indefinite. 

They are ready to acknowledge its reality, but seem to consider its per- 



IW DANGERS OF THE UQUOR TRADE. 

mm more manifeet in man himself than any other creatnre or thing. 
Their enemies they esteem as the more special incarnation of this prin- 
eiple, and next to them they regard a w oithless, mean, and cowardly mdi- 
vJdiial of their own people. They also look upon creatures of an injurious 
•nd hurtful nature, as the greater or less impersonation of eviL 

Their notions of right and wKfas are equally simple. 

It is right to be brave, to do good to friends, to relieve the needy, to feed 
the hungry, and to worship the Great Spirit — these are acts of general 
porality. There are various other duties taught by their code relative to 
intercourse with each other,— to children and parents, husbands and wives, 
deference to age, chastity etc., the performance of which is essential to 
firtue. 

The line of demarkation between virtue and vice is yet more simple and 
comprehensive ;— every thin^ derelict of riffht b wrong. 

I shall recur to several pomts, connected with the foregoing subjects, in 
another place. 



CHAPTER IX. 

Dtngen connected with the liquor trade.-^Dtfficulty with Bull Eai^Ie. — Soenet of 
bloodshed and honor. — Cheatuig m the fur trade.— How the red man becomea 
tutored in vice. — A cbiefs daughter oflfered in exchange fw liquor. — ^Indian mode 
of courtship and marriage.— Squaws an article of traffic— Divorce. — Plurality oi 
wives.. 

The difficulty and danger, not to say crime and bloodshed, connected 
with the illicit trade in alcohol, as conducted among our western Indians, 
is great and imminent To illustrate this point, I need only to place beforo 
the reader a summary of facts which occurred, many of them under my 
own observation, during the winter of 1842. 

Soon after our arrival at White river a man was sent to a neighboring 
village with a keg of diluted alcohol, for the purpose of barter. The 
Indians, feeling more disposed to drink than pay for it, demanded the keg 
as a gift " on me prairie." This was refusea. They threatened — ^a fight 
ensued, (the soldiers and trader defending the keg and the Indians trying 
to take it.) Weapons were used, and the result was, both soldiers and 
trader were beaten ofiT,— the latter, after being drag|fed through the lodge- 
fire three or four times, narrowly escaped with his life. 

A party of Indians under the excitement of strong drink, attacked and 
took a trading house of the American Fur Company, near by, — robbing it 
of both liquor and goods. 

Two parties in the Fur Company's employ, from difierent posts, met at 
a neighboring village,— one having goods and the other alcohol. The 
Indians, as usual, got drunk, and commenced a fi^ht among themselves ;-^ 
because the goods-trader happened to be in the lodge of one of the weaker 
party, the^ attacked him. He was compelled to fiee, and barely escaped 
with his hfe through the friendly interference of the squaws, flis goods 



• . 



~1~f-~ 




SCENES OF BLOODSHED AND HORROR. 119 

were all stolen ; — while one of the Indians who defended him was hrataHy 
murdered, and several others wounded. 

Not long afterwards, oar trader was shot at, three or four times, while 
engaged in this dangerous traffic, and one of his soldiers severely wounded. 

A^ut the same time, the trader of another company received a deep 
stab, while dealing out the vile trash, and would have been killed but for 
the energetic efibrts of his soldiers. 

Previously to the above, the Indians seized upon a trader and compelled 
him to stand over a hot fire until he was nearly roasted alive, — ^meanwhile, 
helpii^ themselves to his stock in hand. 

Soon after, two warriors came to trade for a blanket at our post,— one 
of whom was drunk. While being waited upon, the latter drew his knife 
and was in the very act of stabbing the unsuspecting clerk, as I caught his 
wrist and arrested the blow. 

At another time, as our trader was standing surrounded by us all, he was 
shot at by a drunken Indian, who, by the merest accident, missed his object. 

Again, one night a party of drunken Indians undertook to fire the house 
in order to consume us alive, but were providentially prevented, owing to 
its being constructed of green pine logs. 

The most dangerous time I experienced during the winter was near the 
close of it. An Indian employed as our soldier, became crazed upon the 
drugged liquor of the Amencan Fur Company, and made his appearance 
before us in a high state of excitement. This fellow had been denominated 
b^ his people the Bull Eagle, (Tahtunga-mobellu,) and was a chief,— 
highly esteemed as a medicine-man, and regarded as the greatest brave in 
the Sioux nation. He was a tall, well-made, noble-looking person — and,— 
such eyes ! I never saw the like planted beneath the brows of any other 
mortal. They glared like lightning, and, as they fell upon the inmvidual 
to whom direct^, seemed to penetrate the very soul and read the embryo 
thoughts of his heart. 

Through the misrepresentations of those in the interest of the Fur Com- 
pany, he iJELncied himself misused by our trader, and came determined on re* 
venge. Arms in hand and stripped for the contest, accompanied by his wife 
and two or three friends, he confronted us, — ^his strange appearance told 
for what In the fury of passion his every look gave evidence of the raging 
demon within. 

Here, lest he should be misunderstood, he premised by a full statement of 
his grievances. They were many, but the chief of them was, that our 
trader had employed another to ^ act soldier*' in his stead, whOe he was too 
drunk to perform the duties of that appointment " I have been dressed'' 
as a soldier," said he, *' to be laughed at, and now Peazeezeef must die !" 
The room was full of Indians, and one of them, an old man, exclaimed ; 
« When Peazeezee dies, let me go under,| — ^I must live no longer !" 

* Previously, he had been presented with a citizen's dress to SRCure him fo^ tb# 
eoiDpany's interest. 

t Yellow-hair. The Indian name for our trader. 

tThis term implies deaih, or the act of dying. 



. 1^ EFFECTS OF DRUNKENNESS. 

** Is this your love for the pale-fiice 7" retunied the infuriated chleftahk 
« Then die you first !" 

Upon this, seizing the defenceless old man, he drew his knife and made 
a heeut-thrust. The intended victim, however, grasped the descending 
blade in his bare hand and arrested its course— but his fingers wem 
nearly severed in so doing. Here the wife of Bull Eagle rushed up to 
her husband and seized him by both arms, while others interfered, and the 
scene of conflict was removea from tlie apartment to the space in front. 

Now was a general fight. The women and children, crying for tenor, ' 
ran about in the utmost confusion and dismay, — ^while raving combatants 
yelled and whooped, as knives, clubs, and tomahawks were busily dealing 
wounds and scattering blood. 

Soon after, the parties retired to their village, and the melee ended with 
onlj six wounded. 

ui a brief interval the Ball Eagle again returned, accompanied by his 
wife^ — ^the latter eamestlv endeavoring to dissuade him from his purpose. 

A shot was his first salute, on entering the door, which a timely thrust 
from the squaw averted from ite object The kind-hearted creature then 
grasped the bow. Relinquishing it in her hands, the madman made a pasa 
at the trader with his tomahawk, — tliis blow was dodged, and the heroine, 
rushing between the two, prevented its repetition, Droppingr his tomahawk, 
he then fell upon the object of his hatred, butcher-knife in hand. 

But here he found himself in the firm grasp of several friendly Indians, 
by whom he was borne from the room. 

This state of aflairs was the si^rnal for another engagement between 
Bidl Eagle, at the head of his partizans, aud the friends of the whites,— 
more desperate and bloody than the former. With great difficulty we re- 
tained our arms from the forcible grasp of the contending factions. This, 
to us, was a moment fraught with extreme peril — ^not knowing friend from 
foe, and instantly apprehensive of the knives and arrows of the avengeful 
throng. It was, indeed, a moment when the agpny of suspense quivered 
with Uirilling intensity upon every nerve, and vibrated in every sinew. To 
fight, would have been a relief. But, whom should we fight? It might have 
bSsn our best friends — for who could discriminate 7 The death of one 
connected with either party, at our hands, would have proved the signal for 
our instant slaughter. Both would have united to exterminate us, — and, 
beset as we were, upon all sides, prudence dictated a strict nutrality. 
Sometimes fifteen or twenty would be struggling for our arms at once^— > 
a strong temptation, as the reader may rest assured, for us to use them in 
self-defence. 

Meanwhile the conflict continued with unabated fury. Several attempts 
were made upon the life of Bull Eagle, but without success. Two were 
killed and others wounded, when a final stop was put to the further effusion 
of blood by the withdrawal of the chieftan to his lodge. 

In about an hour subsequent, he returned for the second time, — bat 
reason had now resumed her sway, and he came to apologize for his bad 
conduct. Calling our trader his *' very good, his best friend," he cried for 
ffrief that he had attempted to kill him. He averred that liquor had made 
him a/oo2, and said he should never cease to regret the great wicked* 
ness he had ^ught of domg to his '^ best friend." Ever after this 



CHEAinVO. 191 

ha nmained oar stead&gt friend, and presented our trader with ax sapar- 
ibe robes, in evidence of the sincerity of his repentance. 

The foregoing resolta of this in&moos traffic, are only a few of the 
many instances of like nature I might cite, in proof of its imminent danger 
t9 those ensaged in its prosecotion}— bat tliis is not the darkest part of the 
picture. There are yet scenes in reserve, more bloody and dreadful than 
those above recited, though not, peihaps, quite as perilous to the whites 
thnnselves. They all occurred m the wmter oi 1843, daring the brief 
period of two months, and resalted immediately from the sale of liquor. 

I shall not enter into details, but content myself by laying before the 
reader a mere synopsis of facts. 

In November, the American For Company^ from Fort John, sent a 
quantity of their drugged liquor to an Indian village, on Chugwater, as a 
gift, for the purpose of preventing the sale of that article by their competi- 
tors in trade. The conlsequence was, the poor creatures aU ffot drunk, and 
a fiffht ensued, which ended in the d^Uh of two head chiefe. Bull Bear and 
Yeflow Lodge, and six of their friends, — besides the wounding of fourteen 
others, who took part in the affiray. 

Soon after, an af&ir occurred fix>m the same cause, resulting in the 
death of three. 

About the same time, another of like nature took place in the Chyenne 
village, and three more were killed. 

Several were also killed, in the interval, in the vicinilhr of the Chyonne and 
Missouri rivere, by their friends and companions, while under the madden- 
ing iiuQuence of intoxicating drink, — ^the precise number is not known. 

The veiy last trade at the close of the season, produced its usual deeds 
of bloodshed and murder. Two Indians were kiUed, and the person who 
sold to them the vile article narrowly escaped with his life. 

I might go on still further with the sickening sketch ; but, as enough has 
already been said to shock the sensibilities of the reader, in endeavoring to 
afibrd him some idea of the enormities and untold horrors connected with 
this criminal traffic, I must forbear. 

The liquor used in this business, is generally third or fourth proof whiskey, 
which, after being diluted by a mixture of three parts water, is sold to the 
Indians at the exori>itant rate of three cups per robe,— the cups usually 
hokling about three gUls each. 

But, notwithstanding the above unconscicmable price, a large share of die 
profits result from the in^nious roguery of those conducting the trade. 

Sometimes the measunnfiHsup is not more than half fuU ;— then, again 
the act of measuring is hme otner than mere feint, (the purchaser receiv 
inff not one fourth the quantity paid for.) 

When he becomes so intoxicated as to be unable to distinguish the diflfer- 
ence between water and liquor, (a thing not rare,) the former is passed off 
upon him as the genuine article. 

Another mode of cheating is, by holding the cup in such a manner that 
the two front fingers occupy a place upon the inside, and thus save to tha 
trader nearly a ^H at each filling. 

SoDie have two cups, (one of the usual size, and the other less,) which 
11 



122 A CHIErS DAUGHTER. 

are so exchanged as to induce the purchaser to believe he is obtainiog % 
third more than he actually receives ; and others, yet more cunning, fill Bw 
measure half full of tallow and deal out the liquor from offit^ — the witlea 
dupe, not thinking to ezamme the bottom, supposes he receives the lequi- 
aite quantity. 

No v^onder the Indian, with such examples before him, learns to hate the 
white man, and despise and abhor his boasted civilization. No wonder he 
looks with an eye of suspicion, alike upon his religion and his leamingi 
and revolts at the thought of either, as Uie ingenious devices of scientinc 
roguery. He is taught all the white man's vices before he learns any of 
his virtues. The emissaries of Satan, by their untiring efibrts, e^ctuallv 
stop his ears, blind his eves, and harden his heart, ere yet the heralds of 
the Gospel set foot upon his soil, to tell him of the blessings of ChristiaDity, 
and the way to happmess and to heaven. 

If the Indian is bad, it is because the white man has made him so. IJih 
contaminated by intercourse with the ofiscourin^ of civilization, who come 
to cheat and despoil hirn of his propertv, and cSprive him of his comforts, 
YOU find him quite a diflTerent being. You find nim brave, generous, and 
hospitable, as well as possessed of many exemplary moral qualities. If he 
is a savage, he might, in many respects, prove a safe and worthy teacher 
to those who pride themselves upon a more enlightened education* 

He has a heart instinctive of more genuine ^ood feeling than his ndute 
neighbor — a soul of more firm integrity — a spirit of more unyielding inde- 
pendence. Place the white man m his condition, divested of all the re- 
straints of law, and unacquainted with the learning and arts of civilized 
life — surrounded by all the associations of the savage state — and the Vi- 
dian, by comparison, will then exhibit, in a more strikmg light, that innate 
superiority he in reality possesses. 

No : The Indian shoula not be despised. He holds weighty claims upon 
our pity, our compassion, and our respect, — ^but never should he be 
dsed. 



Old Bull Tail, of whom I had occasion to sneak in a former chapter 
having forgotten the wholesome sentiments he aavanced at the time refer- 
red to, took it into his head to have a spree. But, as he was not possemed 
of the means to obtain the wherewith, he adopted a somewhat novel sub- 
stitute. 

He had an only daughter, — and she was handsome — ^the pride of hor 
fiimily and the IxMist of her village. She was lovely, and all the high qual- 
ities of a princess were exhibited in her deportment. But, Bull TaU must 
drink ; why not give his daughter to the Yellow-hair and receive from Inm 
a keg of liquor as a marriage present? 

This thought was acted out, and one morning the old chief came to itt, 
followed by his daughter, who, aware of her famer's designs, gave vent to 
her grief in a flood of tears. 

As he entered the door, our trader addressed him : 

TVoflkr. Bull Tail is welcome to the lodge of the Long-knife ;-4>at, 
why is hip daughter, the pride of his heart, bathed in tears 7 It pains me 
that one so beautiful should weep. 



INDIAN MODE OF COURTSHIP. 128 

BvU TaH Chintzille is a foolish girl. Her fiftther loves her, and Umd^ 
^le she cries. 

lyader. The contrary should prove a greater cause for grief! 

SvU Tail, The Yellow-hair speaks well, and truth only falls fixnn his 
lips. 

Trader, How, then, can she sorrow 7 Bid her speak and tell me, that 
I may whisper in her ear words of comfort 

Bull Tail* Nay, pale-face ; but I will tell thee. Bull Tail loves hit 
daughter much — ^very much ; he loves the Yeilow-hair much !— he loves 
them both, very much. The Great Spirit has put the thought into his mind 
that both might be alike his children ; then would his heart leap for joy at 
the twice-spoken name of father ! 

Trader. What do I hear ? I know not the meaning of thy words. 

BuU Tail, Sure, pale-face, thou art slow to understand ! Bull Tail 
would give his daughter to the Yellow-hair, — for who like him is so worthy 
to take her to his loAse 1 Bull Tail has for a lonff time called the pale* 
&ce his brother, and now he would claim the Yellow-hair as his son. 
Loves he not Chintzille ? 

Trader, Were I to deny my joy at the words of Bull Tail, my tongue 
would lie ! The Yellow-hair nas no wife, and who, like the lovely Chintz- 
ille, is BO worthy that he should take her to his bosom 7 How could he 
ever show his gratitude to her noble father ! 

BvU Tail. The ^ift is free, and Bull Tail will be honored in its accept* 
ance^ — ^his friends will all be fflad with him. But, that they may bless the 
Yellow-hair, let him fill up Uie hoUow-wood * with fire-water, and Bull 
Tail will take it to his lodge ; — ^then the maiden shall be thine. 
' Trader, But, Chintzille grieves, — she loves not the Yellow-hair! 

Bvll Tail, Chintzille is foolish. Let the Yellow-hair measure the 
fire-water and she shall be thine ! 

Trader, Nay, but the Yellow-hair may not do this. Chintzille should 
never be the wite of him she loves not! 

The old man continued to plead for some time, in order to bring to a sue- 
eessful issue the negotiation by which he hoped to *'wet his whistle" and 
gain a son-in-law, — ^but all to no purpose. Our trader could not be persua* 
ded to form an alliance so entangling upon any such terms, and the chief* 
tain left with all the lineaments of disappointment and chagrin depicted upon 
his countenance. 

The mode of marriage prevalent among the mountain and prairie tribes 
would seem rather strange and somewhat unfair to the better informed of 
dvilized communities. 

The lady has tittle to say or do in the business. When an Indian takei 
it into his head to set married and meets with the squaw suiting his foncy^ 
he wastes no time m useless courtship, but hastens to her famer and de- 
mands of him to know how much he loves his daughter and what gift of 
horses will make his heart rejoice in a son-in-law 7 

The &ther, after consulting with bis daughter and her mother, states the 

•Keg. 



124 POLYGAinr. 

tenns. If these prove agreeable to the suitor, he immediately aco^pts 
them, and the twam ^ become one flesh '' without further ceremony. 

In case the woman has no &ther, her eldest brother fills his place,— and 
if she have neither Either nor brother^ her next nearest relative aasumes 
the responsibility of bestowing her in marriage. 

If she be the eldest daughter, and has unmarried sisters, the bridegroom 
becomes equally entitled to them, and is looked upon as their common hus- 
band. 

The first year succeeding this new relation, the bride's fiunily comrider 
all the horses and other valuables of the new-made husband as their own; 
the second year he is permitted to retain his personal property for the use 
of himself and wife ; — but the third year he enjoys an equal right with his 
relatives to everything in their possession. 

The decision of parents in the bestowment of a daughter in mairiage Is 
generally controlled by the largeness of the amount orored ; thus showing 
that civilized life is not the ovly condition in which individuals are seme- 
times governed by sordid motives in pronouncing upon questions €i such 
vital importance to the welfare of others. 

The female is the only party upon whom the marriage contract is con- 
sidered binding. 

The man may sunder it at any time suiting his convenience or caprice. 
He has the power, even, to dispose of his wife to another, or, at a mere 
word, to absolve himself from all obligation to her. In case of the latter, 
the discarded one returns to her Bither's lodge, — ready again to test the re- 
alities of this uncertain relationship, whenever an opportunity presents it- 
self meeting with the approval of those who assume to make barter of 
her aflections and person. 

A woman, to be happy in this state of society, should never indulge In 
that fancied passion, pictured in such glowing colors by crack-brained 
poets and novel-writers, called love ; — or, if she has the assurance to do 
otherwise, it should be of that more versatile and accommodating order, so 
often exhibited in more refined circles, which may be reclaimed and trai»- 
ferred as interest or circumstances suggest Her affections are not at her 
own disposal, and, to render life tolerable, she must learn to love onk/ u 
she is loved, and to love herself above all others. 

Next to horses, women constitute an Indian's chief wealth. This ci^ 
cumstance not unfrequently results in one individual appropriating to 
himself six or eight 

The squaw is compelled to dress robes and skins, make moccasioB, 
cure and take ccu'C or meat, attend to the horses, procure fire-wood, and 
perform sundry other little drudgeries that an Indian will not dtk 
Through her he becomes possessetT of the means of procuring from tiie 
whites such articles as his necessities or fancy may require. A pluialltf 
of wives with him, therefore, is more a matter of economy than olte* 
wise. 



126 



CHAPTER X. 

Talitim£a-goni8ka.p— High gaming.— WearHwn* WarkpoUo, a itrango ^baj^^ 
The Beaih Song, a tale of love. — MediciDe^msn. — ^ExUaordinary perfonnaDoe of 
Tahtnnga-inobellu. — Wonderful feato of jugglery. 

Amono our daily visitors was Tahtonga-egoniska, a bead chief of the 
Brale village. 

Years had bleached his locks with their taming frosts and taught him 
self-government. Well disposed as a man, he never became a participanl 
in those disgusting scenes of intoxication that almost continually transpir- 
ed around us. He was a mere looker on — a moralizer ; and, as he witnesa- 
ed the blameworthy conduct of his people, an ill-suppressed sigh was fre- 
quently audible, and the inward workings of regret were plainly defined 
vpon his countenance. Melancholy too had left ner traces upon him, and» 
as he sat day by day in gloomy silence, he seemed the very impersonatioOi 
of j|rie^ 

Whenever the throng dispersed for a few moments, he would impioT6 
the opportunity for conversation with us ; for in the benevolence of his heart, 
he loved the whites, and was greatly pained at the injuries and injustice it 
was so often their lot to endure. 

But he had a story of his own to tell ; it was a tale of affliction — a stab* 

at the best feelings of a father's heart ! And, by whom ? By the very 

whites he loved ! Aye, by the very men whose business it was to degrade 

his people and ruin them by the contaminating effects of an unhallowed 

' intercourse ! 

Six months had scarcely yet passed since the old chief had been called to 
mourn his youthful hope, and the pride and joy of his declining years — ^hia 
first-bom son ! And that son had fallen by the hand of the white man ! 

Still, the sorrow-stricken father harbcared no thought of revenge ; he 
sought nothing for himself save the locks of that son, that he might hang 
them within ms lodge, and gaze upon them and weep ! 

His simple tale was so touching in its nature it served to enlist the deep 
sympathies of our hearts. We began to regard him with much deference, 
and felt quite at home in his company. He would frequently entertain vs 
with his anecdotes as occasions suggested, and at such times he invaria- 
bly proved both agreeable and communicative. 

llie history of his own Ufe, too, was &r from uninteresting. He was 
the only one of the Brule chiefs, then living, who had signed the first 
treaty with the whites, since which he had ever observed its stipulations 
with scrupulous exactness, and still carefully retamed a silver medal be- 
stowed upon him by the Government agent at that time. 

Some of his stories were garbed with a strange romance, and thoncb 
they may appear foreign to truth in many ' respects, I cannot resist 3m 
temptation of presenting a few of them to me reader. 

It* 



196 HIGH GAMING. 

One day, eeveral IndiaiiB had betted largely np(Mi a **game of hand;*** 
this called forth fix>in the old man the following story: 

** When a young man I delighted in war, and seldom did a party of our 
people visit the enemy that included me not with its number. These 
scars teU where I stood when arrows flew thick — Chastening to spill the 
blood of the brave. 

" Rarely did we return empty-handed from the foeman's land — without 
horses to ride or scalps to dance. Yet, at times we came back like fools, 
and were ashamed to afmear at the soldiers' feasts. 

"One of these times 1 well recollect, and I will tell of it to my white 
children, that they also may remember it 

** We were proceeding against the Crows, and, h'ke experienced warri- 
ors, had sent our spy in advance to lode for the enemy. Hurrying on, in 
momentary expectation of a conflict, the stout hearts of our braves were 
appalled by his return without robe or arms, and scalpless— and with a 
face suflused in blood. 

** This was his stoiy : The enemy, aware of our approach, were awaiting 
as in CTeat numbers. Encountering their scouts, he had been robbed a^ 
scalped, and left f jr dead. In this situation he lay till darkness shut down 
upon the mountain and the night-breeze gave him strength to meet us and 
mdvise our speedy return. 

^ Believing the strange tale, we hastened to revisit our lodges, and be 
laughed at. 

** Threfie moons sped, and we again penetrated the land of the foemen. 
The scalpless warrior, far in advance of the main party, once more dis- 
charrod tne duties <>f a spy. 

'* This time a whoop of triumph announced the result of his mission, 
as be made his appearance with the scalps of two, waving from his spear. 

" He tarried not to relate his adventure, but urged us instantly onward. 
Following him, wc were led to the enemy ;— we fought and were victo-* 
rious. 

^ Among the slain was one whose scalp was wanting. Who has done 
this 7 ask^ the wondering braves. But none answer^ Our spy, smi- 
ling, at length broke silence : 

'''Behind yon hill,' said he, *a fountain chants melody fit for warriors* 
«ar8,— let's to it, that we may drink.' 

** Following his direction, he led to a silvery spring overhung by crags 
and shaded by cottonwoods. 

'* * Drink, warriors,' he exclaimed ; when, withdrawing abruptly, he soon 
returned, and witli the arms and robe which were his own in other days. 
, " Warriors,' resumed the spy : * you wondered at my mishap, and 
lamented my hard lot when last we visited the Crowman's country ;— you 
wondered at the condition of one among the recent slain, and asked for a 
reason; — and, doubtless, you wonder still more that I now stand before 

* This ifl a common game with the mountain Indians. It is commenced by one of the 
players who encloses a gravel-stone or a bullet in the curve of his two hajids by pia- 
eing the palms together, then, after foundry tosts and evolutions, suddenly parting 
^m. If the opposing party is shrewd enough to guess in which hand the stone is 
i^tained, he wins ; if not not, be loses. Larc^e amounts are often wagered upoQ tiie 
rwult of this play. * 



A SmiANGE STORY. tXI 

yxn bearing the store of which I was deprived ! — and ftin you wonld know 
in what manner I obtained the hair of two. 

'^ ' Three times has the nightKineen tamed her full &ce to smile npon the 
prowess of Lacota arms, since at this very spot I met an enemy. We 
roshed towards each other for the attack. ^Twas then he cried : 

** ' Are we not both braves ? why should we fight 7 When onr people 
meet in the fray, then may we join arms,~-till then, a truce.' 

« * To this I replied, 

** * Says Crowman peace ? — then, be there peace.' 

** * Thus said, we shook hands and sat down by the fountain. 

** ' Willing to amuse the foe, I gathered a pebbJe and proposed a game 
of hand. The challenge was accepted, and we played, — first, arrow against 
arrow, then bow against bow, robe against robe, and scalp against scalp. 

** * I was unsuccessful and lost all, — arrow, bow, robe, ana scalp. I gave 
up all, but with the extorted promise that we should here meet again for 
another trial of skiU. 

** ' True to the word, we did meet again. We played, and this time, the 
Good Spirit showed me kindness. 

** * Winning back arrows, bow and robe, I staked them all a^nst the 
lost scalp. The game was a close one ; but again the Good Spirit favored 
me, and I won. 

*< < Crowman,' said I, * scalp against scalp.' 

" < The banter was accepted, and the play continued. He lost, and I, 
with my winnings, arose to leave. 

^ ' Warrior,' exclaimed the luckless player, * meet me in the fight, that 
we may try the game of arms,' ^ 

**^ * Thy words please me,' I answered. ' Will the Crowman name the 
place?' 

*** A valley lies beyond this hill,— there my people await their enemies, 
and there let me hope to see you with them.' 

** * To that place I led you. We fought and conquered. My opponent at 
play was among the slain. Need I tell you who took his scalp ?" 

The old man seemed to take pleasure in acquainting us with the man- 
ners and customs of his people, and was ever readv to assign a reason for 
any of them, whenever such existed. He repeated to us the names of all 
the streams, mountains, and prominent localities of the country, and 
exj^ained the causes of their several christenings. 

aame thirty miles to the westward of us, flowed a large creek, called by 
the Indians, "Weur-sena Warkpollo," or Old Woman's creek. This 
stream is an affluent of the Chyenne river, and takes its rise at the base 
of a mountain bearing the same name. 

The mountain is an object of great veneration with the Sioux, who rarely 
enter into its neighborhood without bestowing upon it a present of meat 
The old man entertained us with the following explanation of a custom so 
singular : i. < 

** My grandfather told mtf a tale he had received fix>m the old men befora 
him, anditis a strange one. 

*^ Many ages past bring us back to the time when the IacoCm lived i0 
a country far above the sun of winter.* 

*Tli0ikordL 



128 A STRANGE STORY. 

^ Here, then, the Shoehone reared hie white lodge, and scoured the 
prairies in pursuit of game ; while, as yet, the whde country abounded 
with lakes and ponds of water, and only the highlands and mountains were 
left for t^ buffiuo and deer. 

** But years passed on,— 4he mountains and highlands continued to prey 
upon the waters, and the creeks and rivers gradually reduced the limits of 
their possessions. 

" Years again fled. The Shoshones, attracted by some better region, far 
away, or driven from their homes by the hostile encroachments of other 
tribes, gave place to the Scarred-arms.* 

^ In the course of generations, the Lacotas and the Scarired-arms war- 
red with each other ; they fought with varied success for many years. 

** Once a part^ of the Lacotas penenetrated into the heart of the enemy's 
country ; on their return, thev fell into an ambuscade, and only six of them 
were left to tell the fate of their companions. 

^ Hotly pursued by the Scarred-arms, they sought refuge in a mountain. 
There an obscure passage led to a recess in the mountain's side, which 
they entered, and were pleased to find within it a gravelly floor, and a 
pure fountain of sweet water. 

^ Tempted by the conveniences and security of the place, they thought 
to remain for a few days that they might recover their strength. A small 
fire was built accordingly, and the six braves seated themselves around it, 
recounting to each other tiieir perils and dangerous exploits, and planning 
some mode of extrication from their present difficulties. 

^ Thus busied, a rustling noise from a dark corner of the apartment 
startled them, — but still more were they aroused by the half-disclosed form 
of a person moving in the distance. Words gave place to silence, as the 
warriors, seizing their arms, awaited the feared assault. But the figure, 
on advancing nearer, proved that of a feeble old woman, who addressed 
the wondering group in their own language. 

^ * Children,' said she, ' you have been against the Scarred-arms, — ^you 
have fought them, — and of a strong party, you alone survive. I know it 
all. 

*^ ' You seek in my lodge a refuge from your pursuers,— and the sound of 
your voices with the heat of your council-fire has disturbed my rest and 
awoke me from a long, long trance. 

" * Your looks enquire my story. 

*' * Many ages have gone, (for days, moons, seasons, and ages are painted 
before me as they pass,) since the Shoshones, who lived where now live 
the Scarred-arms, visited the lodges of the liusotas, and bade the prairie 
drink the blood of slaughtered braves. I was their captive, and with the 
scalps of the slain I was taken from the graves of my people, many days 
travel. 

** < The Shoshone brought me to this country, when yet the bufiyo grazed 
upon the hills and mountains, only ; for the valleys and plains were tiie 
home of waters. 

*" Living with the Shoshone, I vtras not happy. I thought of my peo* 

*Chyeniim. The name owes iti ori^ to the prsctioe of fcaning the left ans 
mmKWUo yet adhexed to by the males ot that nation. 



A STRANGE STORY. 1» 



IWMWW^'^'^VW^^^^'^'*'^^^*^'^^^'^^ 



ptey with all those dear to roe, and prayed the Grood SjMrit that I mij 
agam behold them ere my passa^ to the death-land. 

** * I fled, hoping to reach the home of my birth ;-4>ttt age had enfeebled 
BW, and being pursaed, I sought refuge in tliia cave. HeTe,» having pasaed 
a night and a day in earnest oommonion with the Big Medicine,*- a stianga 
feelins came upon me. I slumbered, in a dreamy state of omsciousiieaa, 
from wen till now. 

*< ' But your looks again ask, who are the Shoshones ?— what became of 
them ? And from whence were the Scarred-arms 7' 

'< ' The Lacotas will soon know the Shoshones, and bring from their 
lodges many scalps and medicine-dogs. Divided into two tribes, that 
nation long since sought home in otlier lands. One crossed the snow- 
hills towards the sun-setting ^the Lacotas shall visit them, and avenge 
the blood and wrongs of ages. The other journeyed far away towards the 
sun of winter, and now tive to the leftward of the places where the His* 
panola builds his earth-lodge.* 

** * Then came the Scarred-arms from a far ofl* country, a land of much 
B^ow and cold. Pleased with the thickly tenanted hunting grounds thtt 
here met them, they stopped for the chase, and, by a possession through 
successive generations, have learned to consider these grounds as their 
own. But Uiey are not theirs. 

*^ *• The Great Spirit gives them to the Lacotas, and they shall inhabit the 
land of their daughter's captivity^ - V 

^' Why wait ye here? Go anSUj^ilnige the Uood of your comrades 
upon the Scarred-arms. They e\^ now light their camp-fire by the 
stream at the mountain's base. Fear not, — their scalps are yours! 
Then return ye to my people, that ya may come and receive your inhere 
tance. 

^ ' Haste ye, tliat I may die. And, oh Warkontunga 2 inasmuch as thou 
hast answered the prayer of thine handmaid, and shown to me the fiices of 
my people, take me firom hence.' 

^ The awe-struck warriors withdrew. They found the enemy encamped 
at the foot of the mountain. They attacked him and were victorious ;— 
thirty-five scalps were the trophies of their success. 

^ On reaching their homes the strange adventure excited the astonish* 
ment of the whole nation. The Scarred-arms were attacked by our wai^ 
liors, thus nerved with the hope of triumph, and were eventually driven 
firom the country now possessed by the Locotaa as their own. 

^ The ^teful braves soon sought out the mountain, to do reverence to 
the medicine-woman who had tola them so many good things. A niche in 
the mountain-side, from whence issued a sparlding streamlet, tdd their 
place of refuge ; but the cave and the woman alike had disappoued. 

*'£ach successive season do our warriors visit the Shoshones fw scalps 
and medicine-dogs. — and each of our braves, as he passes the Old Woman's 

*It jfl a angular fact, that the Cumanches and Snakes, (Shoehonea,) thongh living 
nearly a thousand miles distant from each other, with hostile tribes intervening, 

Sk precisely the same language, and call themselves by the same general name. 
y mtve lost all tradition, however, of having fonned ODa nation, in any pvevions 



130 THE DEATH SONQ. 

mountain, fails not to bestow npon it his tribute of venentton, or quench 
liis thirst from the creek that bears her name." 

A place on White river — ^where the stream pours its full force againrt 
the iNLse of a lofty peak, and the powerful attrition of its watess has fonned 
A rocky precipice of several hundred feet in height — ^is known as **Tbe 
Death Song.'* The singularity of this name led me to enquire the reasons 
which prompted its bestowment Ever ready to answer questions of this 
nature, the old chief related the following story : 

*' Once, on a time, the Offlallas and Bumt^hiffhs held their encampmen 
upon the river, opposite to the high point of whidi my son enquires. While 
there, a dognsoldier* of the Bumt-thiffhs received the oflbr of six horses from 
an Oglalla brave, for his only daughter-— a sweet flower— such an one as 
oft pierces the warrior's heart with her charms, when the arrows of ene- 
mies fall harmless at his feet. The ofler was quickly accepted— for the 
dog-soldier was poor. 

'* When Chischille (for that was the name of the &ir one) heard she 
was to become the wife of the Oglalla, she cried for grief,— and so obetinale 
was her resistance, the marriage was deferred for several days on th«k 
account 

** But, why did Chischille grieve ? She had looked upon a handsome 
warrior of her own village, and she loved him. She forgot her duty, as a 
daughter, to ]ove only^ at ner father's bidding. Her heartliad been playing 
truant aiui had lost itself in the labyrinths of girlish fimcy. Bitter were 
the fruits of that presumption. 

** Chischille, in the interval, contrived to meet the one of her chmce, and 
the two fled towards a distant village, there to live in the undisturbed en« 
joyment of their youthful loves. 

** But, alas, for them I They were pursued, a|H! overtaken. The life of 
the young warrior atoned for his temerity,-— while ChischiUe was cruelfy 
beaten and brought back to her Other's lodge. 

** The OglaUa had already paid the purchase price, and, ere the morrow's 
sunset, was to receive his fair prize at the hand of the dog-soldier. 

" Chiscliille, arising with the dawn, fresh-plaited her hair, and arraying 
herself in her proudest attire, left the lodge. No one thought strange at 
seeing her thus gaily dressed for her wedding day, and, as she tripped 
along, many a warrior's heart beat high and loud at the thought that a 
creature so lovely was to become the bride of another. 

'< Directing her course to the river, she crossed it and ascended the high 
peak upon the opposite side. There, seating herself upon the utmost veige 
of the precipice, she gazed calmly from its dizzy height. ^ 

** In ner lofty station, with her raven locks streaming in the winds, and 
the matchless beauty of her person so enchantingly exposed to vibw, she 
seemed more like a being of the Spirit^Land than aught human. Tbo 
sweetest prairie-flower was ne'er half so lovely. 

** Her strange attitude arrested the eyes of all. 

« »\Vhy sits she there 7 — she will fall and be dashed to pieces !' was the 
general ciy. * But listen — she sings !' 

*Thif ig the title of thoee selected to ■uperintend the dvil affiun of a viUafs. 



ASTONISHING FEATS OF JUGGLERY. 131 

** Why should I stay, — he issone. Light of my eyes^--jqT of m 
■onl^— «how me thy dwelling ! — ^b not here,— His ni away in the Qjgint 
lAnd. Thither he is gone. Why should I stay 7 Let me go !' 

•"< Hear you that 7' said one. < She ainga her death song. ShewiU 
tiuow herself from the cliff!' 

** At this, a dozen warriors, headed by him who claimed her hand, stalled 
to rescue the sweet singer from intended self-destruction. 

** Affain she chants : 

** ' Spirit of Death, set me free ! Dreary is earth. Joyless is time. 
Heart, thou art desdate ! Wed thee another 7 Nay. Death is thy 
husband ! Farewell, oh sun ! Vain is your light Farewell, oh earth t 
Vain are your plains, your flowers, your grassy dales, tout purling streamii 
and shady groves ! I loved you once,-— but now no longer love ! Taste- 
less are your sweets^ — cheerless your pleasures ! Thee I woo, kind Death! 
Wahuspa calls me hence. In life we were one. We'll bask together in 
the Spirit Land. Who shall sunder there 7 Short is my pass to thee. 
Wahuspa, I come !' 

V **Upon this she threw herself forward, as the wairiors grasped at her ; 
but, leaving her robe in their hands, she plunged headlong and was dashed 
to pieces among the rocks below !* 

** E'er since, the young warrior sighs as he beholds this peak, and thinka 
of the maiden's death song." 

Conversing upon the subject of medicine-men, he was asked, whj those 
individuals are so highly esteemed by his peofde 7 To this he repbed : 

** These men are regarded as the peculiar favorites 9f the Great Spirit, 
to whom is imparted a more than onunarj^ share of His power and wisdom. 
We respect them, therefore, in proportion to the abilities they receive^ 
even as we reverence the Great Spirit." 

Here the question was proposed, how are their abilities above those of 
others 7 

*' The Yellow-hair counts as his soldier Tahtunga-mobellu, — a man of 
stKxig medicine. To him the Great Spirit has imparted the power of heal- 
ing, by imbibing, at pleasure, the diseases of the sick, and discharging them 
from his eyes and nose in the form of live snakes.f 

** On a time, years past, our young men went to the Pawnees and came 
back crying; far sixteen sUin of their number were left to grace an enemy's 
triumph. 

** It was winter, and the moans of men and maidens mingled with the 
howling winds. Sorrow beclouded eveiy brow, and brave looked upon 
brave as if to enquire, ' Who shall wipe out this disgrace 7' Then it was a 
medicine-chief stood up, and his words were : 

^ * Be it for me to consult the Good Spirit.' 

* A tale which went the rounds of the jmblic printi, leveml yean since, entitled 
the " Maiden's Leap," affords a seeming coincidence in the mode of suicide ; but, by 
eompuinft the two, the reader will observe a broad dissimflarity of detail. In poa 
ning the lubove I was guided solely by the leading inddents as related in my heanag*. 

ITiUitungarmobeUu receives the averment of all his viUagers in proof of liiit 
ilraiigeieaL 



18S THE MEDICINE-MAN. 

** So laying, he entered his lodge alone, nor suffered any to come near 
during the lone &st that followed. Darkness had closed four times upon 
the prairie, and the sun again hastened to hide behind the mountain peaka, 
when, calling the young men to him, the medicine-man said : 

^* Fetch me now meat and water, with a new robe, and bid my people 
come near, that they may Imow the words that I would speak.' 

** The obedient braves made haste and did as bidden. Folding the robe, 
he sat upon it and partook of the refreshments placed before him. After 
eating he arose, and six large snakes, crawling from the robe one after 
another, sprang fo his shoulder, and, whispering in his ear, vanished from 
light Tne last snake had just tM his message when the chief began : 

** * The Crood Spirit wills it, that we remove from hence. Three moons 
being dead, let three hundred warriors return, and their hearts shall be 
made glad with medicine-dogs and the scalps of enemies.' 

^The village left, twd, at the time appointed, the warriors returned. They 
met the enemy, — foughl^ and were victorious. Sixty-three scalps and one 
hundred medicine-dogs were the fruits of their success." 

Before dismissing the subject, many other particulars were cited in proof 
of the extraordinary abilities of difibrent medicine-men, bat the above being 
the most remarkable, I have thought proper to pass over the remaunder in 
Ailenoe. 

Note. — kn account, still more wonderful than either of the foiegqmg, was subse- 
quently narrated in my hearing, while amoQ§f the Arapaho Indians ; and, without 
YOuehmg for the truth of all its particulars, lam unwilling to withhold it from ths 
leader. 

The performanee alluded to is said to have occnned, some three years since, in the 
pre s e nce of the whole Arapaho village, incredible as it may seem. The actor was a 
Biccaree by nation, and is well known to the mountain traders. 

In the centre of a large circle of men, women, and children, stood the sabject of 
the appended sketch, stripped to the waist, as the gunner's mark. A shot perforated 
bk body with a bullet, which entered at the chest and emerged from the opposite side. 
He instantly fell, and the blood flowing in streams dyed die grass where he lay, and 
everythinj^ seemed to prefieiire the reafity of death. 

While in this condition, nis wife approached and besprinkled his face With water ; 
soon after which he arose, as from a dumber — ^the blood still pouring from him. 
Beplastering his wound with mud before and behind, the blood ceased to flow, when 
he commenced yawning and stretching ; in a few minutes the plaster was removed by 
a pass of the hand, ana neither blood, nor wound, nor the sign of a scratch or scai 
appeared ! There stood the self-restored medicine-man, before the wondering throng, 
alive and well, and in all the pride of his strength ! 

He then brought his naked son into the ring, a lad of some eight years, and, stand- 
ing at a distance of several yards, bow in hand, he pierced him through and through, 
itaok diaphra^ to vertebrse, at three successive shots. 

The boy fell dead, to every appearance, and the thick blood freely coursed from hk 
wounds. 

llie performer then clasped the body in his arms and bore it around the ring fiir 
the inspection of all, three times in succession. Upon this he breathed into his mouth 
and nostrils, and, after suffiising his &ce witJi water and covering his wounds with a 
nad ptaster, he eommenced Inief manipulations upon his stomach, which soon ended 
in a complete recovery, nor left a single trace of injury about him. 

Both of these feats, t£ performed as said, can scarcely admit the possibility of trick 
or aliffht of hand, anO must stand as the most astonishing instances of jugglery on 




An iHDijUt CoHjnos.' 



*••. 



«- V 



■ 















* w 



135 



CHAPTER XI. 

Food for honei.^— SquawB and their peifinmanoeB.— Dogi and dog-meat— >liaCiiRi t» 
Fort— Starvation.— Tiavel by gneH.— Death firom drinking.---fi[edicine-nM]dng.--« 
A huiial. — Litde Lodge and the French trader.— A epeech in connciL — Joamej to 
White river. — High winds and deep mow. — Intenee rafiferingi and painftd roMiUi. 

A LARGE grove of Cottonwood near ub, day after day was graced by groaps 
of village squaws, armed with axes, for thie procurement of horse foodm 

The Dark of this tree is eaten freely by both horses and mules, and 
answers well as a substitute for com or oats. Animals will thrive upon it 
in a remarkable manner, and even in the summer months they prefer it to 
grass. The bark of red elm is also used for the same purpose. 

The operations of the squaws at such times contnbuted ffreatly to our 
amusement Climbing fearlessly to the topmost branch of the hig^ieBl 
tree, they would there lop off the surrounding boughs, with as much apptp 
rent ease as though footed upon terra firma. 

And then, the enormous loads they would cany, lashed together with 
cords and slung to their backs, were enough to make a giant stagger. 
Dogs, harnessed to travees, had their part to perform, and ofttimes were 
they a source of vexation to their mistresses. 

A squaw, trudging along under a full donkey-load of cottonwood, and 
followed by a squad of halt-naked children, presented a spectacle quite in* 
teresting ; but this was rendered rather comical, withal, when two or three 
draugh^dogs with their heavy-laden travees reluctantly brought up the 
resLX — every now and then lying down for weariness, or squatting to loll 
and gaze at their companions. 

Now, she coaxes and caresses to urge them forward — ^they stiU delay. 
Then she turns briskly towards them with a stick, — get out, dogs !— > 
** Yierh ! Warktashne ceicha," cries the squaw, accompanying her denun- 
ciation with blows, and away go the yelping troop as fast as legs can carry 
them. 

Dogs are the necessary appendage of every hidian lodge, and cenerally 
form an equal portion of the village population. They present almost all 
the different varieties of the canine species, from the wolf to the spaniel, 
and irom the spaniel to the hairless dog of Africa. The wolf, however, ia 
predominant, and, taken together, they more assimilate a gang of wolves 
than anything else. Indeed, the diflerent varieties of prairie wolves hold 
famihar intercourse with the village dogs, and associate with Uiem on 
friendly terms. 

The species used for draught, is a large, stout-built, wolfish-looking 
creature, of the Exquimaux breed. Trained to his duties in early life, be 
18 i^eneitilly both submissive and tractable. The drudgery of a squaw, 
which is at all times onerous, without his ready aid would prove past 
endurance. 



136 MEDICINifi-MAKlNG. 

But these dogs are also useful in another respect. Their flesh far- 
Bishes an article highly esteemed for food, and which almost invariaUy 
graces the soldiers' feast and every other scene of conviviality. However 
much the squamishness of the reader may revolt at the suggestion, justice 
impels me to say, the flesh of a £ait Indian do^, suitably cooked, is not infe- 
rior to fresh pork ; and, by placing side by side select parts of the two, it 
would be no easy task even for a good judge to tell the difference, by either 
leoks or taste, unless he w^re previously mformed. 

Towank the last of January, buffiilo having left the vicinity, the Indians, 
as a necessary consequence, were compellea to move. A great scarcity 
of provisions prevailed among them, ana we ourselves were scarcely better 
off than they. 

Our stock in hand was nearly exhausted, and an abandonment of the 
post became absolutely necessary, — a thing, however, which could not be 
performed without a fresh supply of horses and catde from Fort Platte. 
For this purpose, I volunteered my services, and, accompanied by two 
engages, was promptly under way. 

A few hours' ride brought us to the head of White river, where, con- 
suming at a meal our scanty eatables, from that onward we were left en- 
tirelv destitute. 

This was the first occasion subjecting me to the pains of hunger for so 
long a time. The second day I experienced the greatest annoyance, and 
then ic was I felt some of the realities of starvation. The third day, how- 
ever, I awoke in the morning scarcelv thinking of breakfast in fiict, 
my appetite seemed quite passive, and the only sensation I felt was a 
kind of weakness and lassitude, evincing the lack of proper nourish- 
ment. 

The morning was cloudy and threatening. Soon after leaving camp, 
BQOw began to Ml, thick and fast. The day proved so dark, objects were 
indiscernible at the distance of a hundred yards in advance. Travelling, 
as we were, over a trackless prairie, with nothing to guide us but the wind 
and the position of the grass, it was by the merest accident we reached 
our destination a few minutes before nightfaU. 

Our sudden appearance was the occasion of general surprise to the 
Fort hands, and, after a brief explanation, we began to make amends for 
previous abstinence. - 

At first, a few mouthfuls sufficed, — ^but soon I again felt hungry and 
could be satisfied only with a double quantity, — in an equally short time 
my stomach demanded a still further supply, and, by the next day, hunger 
became so keen it seemed almost insatiable. An interval of three or four 
weeks was requisite before it assumed its wonted tone. 

During our stay here, an Indian family, occupying one of the F<Ht 
rooms, imiulged themselves in a drunken spree. 

Having procured a quantity of the American Fur Company's Uquor, the 
eflibcts of their lavish potations soon became manifest to all within 
hearing distance. • But the din of drunken revelry erelong assumed the wail 
of mourning and sorrow. 

Hearing the strange commotion, I entered the room to ascertaia tiio 



A BURIAL. 137 

cause. There laj, helpless upon the floor, and aopaiently at the point of 
death, a sqoaw oi some eighteen years ;— she, in ner eagerness, had swaU 
lowed nearly a pint of the vile Btuff, undiluted, and now experienced iti 
dreadful consequences. 

But most conspicuous in the thrcmg was a large, obese, cross-eyed Indian, 
earnestly engaged in his medicine-perfonnances for her recovery. 

A breech-cloth was his sole garb, as, with eyes half strained from their 
sockets and volving in a strange unearthly manner, he stood, first upon one 
foot and then upon the other, alternately — then, stamping the floor as if to 
crush it through, and meanwhile, ffnmting, screeching, and bellowing, and 
beating his breast or the wall with his clenched fists, — then, with inhaled 
breath, swelling like a pufiP'ball, he would bend over his patient and apply 
Bugescents to her mouth, throat and breast 

This done, sundry ejections of saliva prepared his mouth for the recep- 
tion of an ample draught of water, with which he bespatted her face and 
forehead. 

But yet, all these extraordinary efilbrts fiuled to produce their designed 
efl^ct The poor squaw grew weaker, and her breathing became fainter 
and more difficult. 

Some powerful restorative must be adopted, or she will soon be beyond 
the reach of medicine,-H30 thought the omciating doctor ; or, at least, his 
succeeding antics indicated that such were the cogitations of his mind. 
Standing for a minute or two in the attitude of re&ction, an idea stuck 
him. Ah, he has it now ! This cannot fail. 

Snatching a butcher-knife and hastening with it to the fire, he heats the 
point to redness upon the coals, — ^then baluicinff it between his teeth, at a 
toss he flings it vaulting above his head and hackward upon the floor,-^ 
then, re-catching it, he goes through the performance a second and a third 
time. 

Thus premised, he addresses himself with threefold energy to the gro- 
tesque and uncouth manoeuvres before described. K he hau stamped his 
feet, he now stamps them with a determination hitherto unknown ; — ^if he 
had thumped his breast and beat the walls, he now thumps and beats as if 
each blow were intended to prostrate the object against which it was directed, 
— ^if he had grunted, screeched, and bellowed, he now grunts, screeches, 
bellows, and yells, tilt the very room quakes with the reverberations of 
domoniac noise ; — ^if he had gagged, pufied, and swelled, he now gags, 
pofls, and swells, as if he woiUd explode firom the potency of his extraor- 
dinary inflations. 

Tlien, with an air of confidence, he hies to his patient and commences 
a process of manipulation from her breast downwards, and reverse,— and 
then again he repeats his previous operations, with scrupulous exactness 
and unsparing em>rt, in all their varied minutis. 

Bat, alas for the medicine-man !-^e squaw died, despite the ommpo- 
tence of his skill ! 

Then was enacted another such a scene . of piteous wailing, as Indians 
alone have in requisition, as vent for their grief. 

After the usual preliminaries, the corpse of the deceased was placed 
upon a scafibld beside that of Susu-ceicha, the old chief of whom I have 
spoken in a former chapter. Each member of the bereaved fiunily depo» 



138 SPEECH OF LITTLE LODGE. 

ited a taft of hair in the sack containing the meat and trinkets iikeel 
beneath her head. A smooth piece of cottonwood slab was then afioxed to 
the Bcaflbld, upon which were traced, in vermilion, certain quadrangular 
characters of unknown meaning, — answering well to the idea of an 
inscription of name and age. 

A difficulty occurred about this time between a trader of the American 
Fur Company and an Oglalla chief, known as Little Lodge. 

The latter had become crazed by liquor, and, being rather turbulent, was 
put out of the Fort But, efiecting a re-entrance, he a^in proved equally 
annoying. The trader then commenced quarrelling with him, and under- 
took to seize his arms. This the Lidian resisted, when the trader discharg- 
ed a pistol at him, but missed his object Here was a deadly affiront, that 
blood alone could wipe away. 

With great difficulty, the Indian was finally disarmed and bound. He 
was thus secured till the next day, when he was liberated ; — still, however 
he muttered threats of revenge. 

Two or three weeks subsequently. Little Lod^ was present at a soldiera^ 
feast, and the question of war with the Amencans was a prominent sub- 
ject of consideration. 

Several speeches were made, both for and against it ; and, though the 
prevailing sentiment seemed to be of an adverse kind, it scarcely required 
a half dozen words to tarn the scale upon either side. 

Little Lodge arose to address the council, and the friends of the whites, 
knowing the vengeful spirit that yet rankled in his bosom at the remem- 
brance of his recent injuries, began to fear for the continuance of peace. 

Contrary to the universal expectation, he contended for its maintenance. 
^ But," said he, ^ Little Lodge nas grievances of his own, and they call for 
redress. 

" There is one among the pale-faces whose blood must wash away the 
foal blot that rests upon the name of Little Lodge. I know him weiL 
He is not a Long-knife. The Long-knives are 3l the friends of Little 
Lodge. Let the I^icota take them by the hand whenever he meets them 
upon the pr^drie. It is good that he do so. They are very many and ex- 
ceedingly rich. Their country w a large one, and &r away towards the 
Bunrising. They, too, are strong for war. They have big hearts and 
strong, and they are very ffood to uie red man. They bring to him many 
good things ; why, then, should the Lacota hate the Long-knife ? 

''-Do my brothers ask who it is of the pale-faces the Little Lodge would 
remove from the light of day 7 Know, then, he is not of the Lobg-knivesy 
•^he is of the Warceichas, (Frenchmen.) The Warceichas are not haog' 
knives ! 

^ And, do my brothers ask, who are the Warceichas ? 

*' Aye, who are they|? Little Lodge cannot tell; — ^who of all the Laco^ 
tas can 7 Wlio ever heard of the country of these men 7 No one. They 
have no country, — ^they are no people. They are are as the wandering* 
dogs * that infest our hunting grounds and prey upon the game formed by 
tlie Good Spirit for the red man's sustenance. They steal into the land of 

^Chunka-roonet, or trnvelling dogi, is the name applied by these Indiana to 



INTENSE SUFFERING. 199 

m 

Uie red man, and sneak aroozid fnun place to place ; — ^for they bave no 
home ; they have no country ; they are no people ! 

" One of these it was who bade the medicuie-iron speak it^ death-woid 
to Idttle Lodge, and soa^ht to spill the Uood of a Lacota brave, after that 
^e had made him a fool by means of his thickened* fire-water! 

** Should Little Lodge tall by the hand of the Warceicha ? He mi^t 
fall by the hand of a Lon^-kmfe, and the nation would honor his memory, 
—but neveVy should the Warceicha bring him low ! 

** Then, is it not good that Little Lodge should be avenged upon this lost 
dog — this outcast of the world — that the whelps of a motherless breed may 
cease to insult and wrong the Lacotas? Wfdch of all my brothers win 
saynay ?" 

The address was received in silence, — ^no one presuming to oppose an 
answer to its sentiments. Whether the speaker executed his threats of 
vengeance against the of^nding trader, I am yet unadvised. 

Having remained two niffhts and a day at Fort Platte, we afain started 
for White river, taking wim us three yoke of oxen and several norses, one 
of which was laden with dried meat. 

The snow greatly retarded our progress from the first, and so obscured 
the trail we were compelled to travel mostly by guess. The sun, too, was 
shut out by a tenebrous atmosphere, and we could judge of our proper 
course only by observing the movements <tf the clouds,! with the general 
nnge of the hills and ravines, or inclination of the grass. 

The broad expanse of unhpoken snow lying from Rawhide to L'ean-qui* 
conit, brought a chill tremor with the thought of crossing it Yet, go we 
must ! It was no time to falter when the nite of others, perhaps, depend- 
ed npon our prompt advance. 

But the effort was no child's play. If we had experienced a tedious 
time during a former journey, what could we expect now 7 The whole 
interval of thirty miles was covered with snow, that grew deeper and deep- 
^er as we proceeded. Every hollow and ravine was filled, and the route 
odierwise seriously impeded by huge drifts and embankments. 

' We were frequently compelled to break foot-paths for our animals, and 
ever and anon poll them by main strength from the deep pitfalls into which 
they would plunge and become almost lost to view. In this manner our 
progress was slow, — the average depth through which we waded being 
mit little less than two feet 

The rising of a fierce head wind, piercing as the blasts of Nova Zen»- 
Ua, dreve the snow into our faces with mad fury and added immeasurably. 
to our sufi^ngs. 

^ AHanon is here made to the dragged liquor nippoaed to have been palmed upon 
lum by the trader. 

tThe idea of directing our coarse by the movements of the clouds is doubtless a 
myvel suggestion to most readers ; but its philosophy will be readily compreliended by 
a bare mention of the fact, that the winds of these regions almost invariably blow 
firam a west-southwest point ; and, as they are usually high, it is no very extraordi- 
aaiy uerfbrmance to calculate the bearing of north or south, even in the most obscuiv 
wwmv 



140 A HORRIBLE CONDITION. 

In tibiB manlier night shut down upon us, while yet far distant from aif 
camping-place. And, such a night ! Oh, stonns and deadly winter, Ml 
and fierce ! how swept ye " throai^ the darkened sky,'' and with yonr 
awfnl howlings rendered ** the savage wilderness more wild !" 

The creeping cold on every nerve played freely, in haste to eting ovr 
vitals, and lay us each 



** — ^— — along the mowi a stifibn'd catm, 
Stratch'd oat and bleaching in the northern bhuit !'* 

The impress of this event can never be eflaced from my mind. It wu 
midnight ere we arrived at the timberless L'eau-qui-court and stmck 
camp. Our animab needed water, but we had neither axe or tomahawk 
to cut through the thick ice with which the creek was coated. As a 
remedy for this lack, all three of us advanced upon it, and, by our united 
eflbrts at jumping, caused a lengthy fissure with gentle escarpments to- 
wards each shore, that left midway an ample pool. 

Having driven the cattle to this, in their clumsy movements upon the 
ice, two of them fell, and, sliding down the inclined plain, lay struggling in 
the freezing water, unable to rise. Our only resort was to drag them to 
the shore by main strength ; for, left in their then condition, they must have 
frozen to death in a very short time. 

Here commenced a series of pulling and wrenching, that, in our chilled 
and exhausted state, we were ill-prepared to endure. 

For awhile our efSbrts proved vain. A backward-slide succeeded each 
headway-pull, and vexed us with useless toil. Thus we worried for nearly 
three hours in water knee-deep ! 

At length, having procured a rope and fastened one end to their horns 
and the <^er around a pointed rock upon the shore, and leathering the slack 
at each successive thrust, we finally succeeded in placmg them both, ooe 
after the other, upon dry land. 

But, now we were in a thrice sorry plight Not a stick of wood could 
be raised, far or near, of which to build a fire, and bois de vache, the gxest 
substitute of the prairies, was too deeply covered with snow for procure- 
ment Our clothes, wet to the waist, were frozen upon us, and the merci- 
less wind, with stinging keenness, pierced us through at every breath, and 
stood us forth as living monuments of ice ! 

Coold men of iron endure such incomprehensible hardships,— such in- 
expressible sufferings ? Yet we survived them all ! 

Spreading a few robes upon the snow, we lay down for sleep, dinneriess 
and supperless. I was now seized with a chill, which lasted for two hoan 
or more ; and so violent were its actions I could scarcely keep the coverii^ 
upon me. 

My compamons, however, though not similarly afilicted, were worse off 
than myself One had his hands and ears frozen, and the other his hands 
and feet, — ^the painful consequences of which, as the frost began to yiddto 
the influence of generated warmth, were too apparent in their gnmos and 
writhing. 

Morning at length came, and the son arose bright and dear Ito 



• • • • 



■ • • • 



• •' 



• V ' 

• tf ^ 



HOBSES DEYOUBED BY WOLVEa 143 

winds had ceased tbeir ragings, and a clement atmosphere seemed pouring 
upon ns the bahn of sympathy for miseries so recently endured. 

But their direful effects were not thus easily eradicated. The feet of one 
poor fellow were so badly frozen, it was three months before he entirely' 
recovered ; while another lost a portion of one of his ears. As for myself* 
a severe cold settled in my teeth, producing an intensely painful ache 
and swooUen face, that continued for ^ight or ten days. 

It seems almost miraculous that we should have escaped so easily, and 
often, even after so long an interval, I shudder at the recollection of this 
anguishing scene. 

Two days subsequently we reached our destination, and found all thingt 
ptetty much in statu quo. 



CHAPTER Xn. 

AnothfiT drunken sproe.-^HoT9es devoured hf wolves. — An upset — A blowing up.— 
Jkaing &at of wolves. — A girl offered for liquor.--- Winter on the Platte. — Boat 
building. — Huntins^ expedition. — ^Joumey up the Platte. — Island camp. — Narrow 
escape. — Snow storm —Warm Spring.— Pass of the Platte into the praixies.— A 
valley.— Bitter Cottonwood.— Indian forts.— Wild fruit— RootKligging.—Cbeny 
tea and its uses. — Geology of the country.— Soils, grasses, herbs, plants, and purity 
of atmosphere.— Horse-shoe creek. — A panther. — Prairie dofft and their peculiar- 
ities. 

Our intended evacuation of the post was posponed till the week follow- 
ing, and, meanwhile, the few customers, that still hung on, were careful to 
improve the passing opportunity of steeping their senses in liquor. 

Another general drunken frolic was the consequence, ending as usual in 
a fight and still further attempts upon the life of our tiader. 

ooon after this, our catalogue of disasters was increased by the death 
of two horses, which fell a prev to wolves. 

The case was an aggravated oae, and provoking in the extreme. Both 
of them were '^bnflyo horses," and the fleetest and most valuable in our 
possession, — ^in feet, they were the only ones of which we ventured to boast. 
We had others of little worth, so poor and feeble they could oppose none 
resistance to magpies,"*" and much less to the rapacity of wolves. 

But, no. These blood-thirsty depredators, desirous of a feast of fat 
things, were determined to have it, reckless of cost, — and, the encrimsoned 
tracks, coursing the snowy plain in every direction where passed the swift 

* The magpie of the mountains is the torment of all sore-backed horses, particnlaiiy 
during the winter season. Diespite opposition it will feed upon tbeir skmless flesb, 
often to the very bones. 



144 BOAT BUILDING. 

chargers in vain ctSort to escape, proved that they won their supper at an 
enormous expense of leg-wear. 

Feb, 4th. AD things bein^ in readiness, we bade &rewe)l to winter- 
'^uartors, and commenced our journey. 

Croiising the river soon after, on ascending the opposite bank, a cart ajw 
sot and deposited its contents in the water. T^ie load, consisting of robes 
and powder, became thoroughly saturated, and we were employed a fuU 
hour in fishing it out. The stream being waist-deep and filled with floating 
ice, amid which we were forced to plunge, our task was far from a 
pleasant one. 

The freight needed drying, and we were detained two days for that pur* 
pose. Meanwhile the drenched powder was subjected to the experiments 
of one of our engages. Having spread it to dry, he was carelessly bend- 
ing over it, when a spark from the camp-fire struck the ready ignitible ; 
a sprightly flash, enveloping the luckless wight in a sheet or flame, told 
the instant result Springing to his feet, he exclaimed : 

" Bless my stars ! That's what I call regular blowing up /" 

" Aye, aye, my lad," says one. " You was always a bright youth, — ^but 
never before did you appear half so briUiant, 'TIS a fact, or I'm a liar !" 

Resuming our course, the second night following was passed at a pool 
of water between L'eau-qui-court and Hawhide. ^ere, having placed my 
shoes under my head for better security, I slept soundly till morning. 
Rising at an early hour, I turned for them, but one was missing, and, after 
searching far and near, it could not be found. 

The mystery of its disappearance, however, was fully solved by the nu- 
merous wolf tracks that appeared on all sides ; — some straggling marauder 
had stolen it during the night, and quietly deposited it in his empty stomach 
as the substitute for an early breakfast. 

Our camp at Rawhide was beset with a throng of Indians from an adjoin- 
ing village, who, as usual, were loudly clamorous and importunate for liquor. 
A beautiful young squaw was brought in, to exchange for that article. 
However, their solicitations were of no avail and their vitiated appetites 
went unappeased. 

On the 12th of February we reached the Fort, and thus ended our disas- 
trous and eventful expedition. 

Winter in the neighborhood of the Platte had been remarkably mild, 
and at no time during the season had the snow remained upon the ground 
to exceed a day. Vegetation, even thus early, was beginning to put forth, 
and bring to view the beauty and loveliness of spring. 

Preparations were already on foot for building a Iraat for the transporta- 
tion of furs to the States by way of the river, and, at the solicitation of 
of the company's a^ent, I reluctantly consented to take charge of it during 
tlie voyage, — ^thus deferring, for the present, my design of visiting Oregon. 
The timber used in its construction was procured from the neighboring 
pine hills, and prepared by a laborious process of hand, with the aid of a 
pit-saw. The ribs and other timber were obtamed from an ash grove, a few 



A PETTY LOOKING SET. 145 

miles above the Fort, and three men were busily engaged in patting all 
things in readiness for the expected spring rise — an event which seldom 
occurs before the 16th of May. 

The winter's trade havii^ closed, an interval of nearly three months' 
leisure followed, which resulted in a hunting expedition tMt included my 
self with six others. 

Anxious to explore the mountains, we set our fiices westward ; but, owing 
to the reported closeness of game en route^ very little provisions wen^ 
taken with other necessaries. 

Keeping the river bottom by a rocky ridge for some ten miles, our course 
led throu^ several beautiful groves and broad stretches of rich alluvial 
soil, that presented an encoura^ng prospect to agriculturists. After a 
few hours' ride we came to a pomt at which the stream sweeps round the 
ridge's base, causing a vertical wall of lias and sandstone nearly one hun« 
dr^ and fifty feet high. 

Abandoning the river bottom at this place, we ascended to the hijph 
prairie on the left, where an interesting plateau greeted us, extending far 
away to the south and west, till it became lost in the neighboring moun- 
tains. Continuing on a short distance, we again struck the river, at a 
small opening between two hills, and made camp in a grove of willows. 

Opposite this place is a large heavily woodea islano, of a blueish loam, 
upon a subtratum of fossiliferous limestone. 

Above and below are lofty walls of limestone and ferruginous rock, that, 
in many places, overhang the sweeping waters at their base, and form roof- 
age beneath which swarms of prairie swallows are wont to raise their 
annual broods. 

Consuming our scanty supply of provisions at a single meal, each soon 
disposed of himself for the night A mild atmosphere invited to repose ; 
una, enwrapped in a single r(£e, my troubles were speedily forgotten in a 
quiet slumoer. 

But during the succeeding interval, a change came over the spirit of 
my dream. I was suddenly aroused by the crash of a huge tree, that fell 
across my bed, and only a providential curve arching upwards, had saved me 
from instant death ! 

" Hurra, for me !" I exclaimed, as my startled campmates came cluster- 
ingaround, — ** It's better to be bom lucky than bich !" 

The wind was now blowing a perfect hurricane, and the trees tottered 
around us, threatening every moment to &11. In an hour or so, however, 
the gale abating, we again addressed ourselves to sleep. 

Towards morning, feeling a disagreeable warmth and superincumbent 
pressure, I was induced to uncover, and, looking out, the cause was ex- 

ened by the presence of a dense snow that covered the ground to the 
^ th of several inches. The fallen snow was melting fast, and that yet 
tecending soon merged into rain. 

A pretty-looking set of feUows were we, in a comparatively short time ! 
— 4)lai^ets, robes, clothes, and every article about us were wei-HK>aking 
wet— and covered with mud. It required an eflbrt of several hours to 
kindle a fire, so thoroughly saturated was everything with water ; — this 
done, we all gatliered around it, and — such a group ! — Oh, the beauties 
of mud and water ! A painter might describe it^ — ^I cannot 

13 



146 INDIAN FORTS. 

If the reader imagines we felt in a superlative good humor while stand- 
ing there, breakfastless, shivering, and wet, he has conjured up a strange 
illusion. 

It havinff ceased raining about mid-day, in the course of the afternoon 
we enjoyed a beautiful sunshine for a couple of hours, which enabled us 
to assume a better travelling plight; and, favored by a mild atmosphere and 
clear sky, on the following morning, we again resumed our course. 

Striking upon an Indian trail, we b3re leftward from the river, and, in a 
short ride, came to a sand creek shut in by precipitous embankments of 
limestone, through which our road led by a narrow defile. A transparent 
spring gushes from the right bank with coosiderable noise, furnishing a 
beautiful streamlet to its hitherto high bed, waich is known as the '^ Warm 
Spring." 

A snort distance above the mouth of this creek, the Platte makes its 
final e^ess from the Black Hills through a tunnel-Uke pass, walled in 
upon either side by precipitous clifis of red-sandstone ana siliceous lime- 
stone, sometimes overhanging the stream at their base, and toWering to a 
height of from three to five nundred feet The high table lands consti- 
tuting these immense walls, are surmounted with shrubs and occasional 
pines and cedars, that unite to present a wild romantic scenery. 

Continuing on, and bearing still further leftward, we passed a beautiful 
valley, graced with several springs and a small grove of cottonwood, with 
cherry and plum bushes, near which rose a conical hill abundant in foe- 
siliferous limestone of a snowy whiteness. A diminutive pond in the vicin- 
ity aflbrded several varieties of the testaceous order, both biv(dves and 
univalves — a circumstance quite rare among mountain waters. The soil 
of this locality appeared to be a compound of clay, sand, and marl, and 
well adapted to agriculture. 

Passing this, our course led over a gently undulating prairie, bounded 
on either side by pine hills. The soil was generally of a reddish, sandy 
loam, intermixed with clay ; and, judging from the long dry grass of the 
preceding year, it was both rich and productive. 

Towards night we arrived at a large creek, bearing the name of Bitter 
Cottonwood, — so called from the abundance of that species of poplar in 
its valley. 

These trees generally grow very tall and straight with expansive topS} 
-*4iveraging from twenty-five to one hundred and fifty feet in height. 

The creek occupies a wide, sandy bed, over which the water is dispersed 
in several shallow streams. The valley is broad and of a jetty, vegetable 
mould, variegated, at intervals, with layers of gravel deposited by aqueoos 
currents, ana is bounded on both sides by abrupt acclivities leading to the 
beautiful plateaux and lofty pine hills so abundant in the neighborhood. 

The remains of three or four Indian forts were situated adjoining the 
place selected for our encampment. These were built of logs, amm^ed 
in a circular form, and enclosing an area, sufficient for the acccmmodatioa 
of twenty or thirty warriors. The walls were generally about six feet 
high, with single entrances, and apertures in various places for the use of 
their defenders in case of attack. 

All Indian forts, meeting my observation in subsequent travels, with one OK 
two exceptions, were of the same general description. Some, however 



ciiehry tea. 147 

are almost entirely roofed in by an arched covering, presenting^ a conifonn 
appearance. The only exception to this mode of fortification was of a 
quadrangular form, and in a solitary instance the materials were of rock* 
The latter structure I shaU take occasion to describe in due course. 

The valley gave abundant indicaticm of wild fruit at the proper seasons- 
such as plums, cherries, currants, goose and buffiilo berries, (shepherdia 
argentea.) The signs of game were very plentiful, particularly elk }— - 
after camp two or t&ee of us sallied out with our rifles in quest of these 
wazy animals, whUe others were busily employed in digging for roots to 
appease the gnawing of appetite, which began to make itself most sensibly 
felt by all. 

About sundown both parties came in, — the hunters quite dispirited, not 
having seen any thing in the shape of elk or other game, — ^but the root 
diggers had been more lucky and brought with them a small supply of 
nutritious aliments, which were divided equally among the company,— 4Uid, 
through scarcely a half dozen mouthfuls were apportioned to each, they 
answered, to some extent, the designed object 

These roots consisted of two varieties, viz : pomme blanc^ and com- 
mote. 

The pomme blanc, or white apple, is a native of the prairies and moun* 
tains, oval shaped and about three and a half inches in circumference. It 
is encased in a thin fibrous tegument, which, when removed, exposes an 
interior of white pulpy substance, much like a turnip in taste. It gen- 
erally grows at a depth of three or four inches, in the soil of hill-sides 
and plateaux, where is found a reddish clay loam abundant in fragmentary 
rocks and gravel. The stalk attains a height of about three inches, and in 
general description is quite like a well known article, common to the States, 
called " sheep-sorreL" At the proper season it b^rs a handsome white 
blossom, that would sufl^r no disparagement when placed in juxtaposi- 
tion with many of the choicer specimens of our gardens. 

The commote* is a root much like the common radish in size and ^ape, 
while a brownish skin envelopes a substance of milky whiteness, soft and 
nutritious, and of an agreeable taste. It is found most abundant in river 
bottoms, and requires a rich alluvial soil, well mixed with sedimentary 
deposites and vegetable matter. It generally penetrates to a depth of 
about four inches. Its leaves resemble those of the carrot in shape and 
cdor, and seldom grow to exceed two inches from the ground, while a stalk 
equally unpretending, bears a blueish blossom, not without some just 
clsum to beauty. 

The pomme blanc and commote are equally good whether boiled or raw, 
and are uniformly harmless, even with those unaccustomed to their Uh^e as 
an article of food. 

Making way with our scanty supply, a fire was struck and a kettle of 
teaprepared from wild cherry bark, wnich proved quite wholesome. 

Tnis, as I ascertained, is a drink quite common among mountaineers 
and Indians in the spring season, and is used for purifying the blood and 
leducing it to suitable consistency for the temperature of summer. As 
the successful performer of the task assigned, I most cordially attest to 

*I am ignorant of the meaning or derivation of this name. 



148 FASTING AND FEASTING. 

iti Tirtnesy and recommeiui it as the moat innocent and eflbctiye medicine, 
if medicine it may be called, that can be employed for a result so neces- 
•ary to general health. 

Early on the sacceding day we resumed our journey. 

I now for the fimt time noticed a gradual change in the geological 
character of the country. The soil in many places appears to be sterUe, 
and is generally of a red clayish nature, mixed with sand and fragmentaiy 
rock, imd strongly impregnated with mineral salts, amons which nitie 
forms a prominent component Some spots, for a consicferable estent, 
are entirely destitute of vegetation, and preheat a surface whitenef by 
saline efflorescences, among which nitre and sulphate of soda form a 
predominant part. 

The character of the various moulds (with the exception of the allii- 
vion in the vicinity of the rivers and creeks) is almost entirely primitive^ 
like numerous strata of roclcs upon which they repose. 

The grass, from the dry specimens of the previous summer's growth, 
appeared to be of a longer and a coarser kind, and more sparse and iso- 
lated. The short bufSiio-grass of the grand prairie had almost entirely 
disappeared, — in some places a blueish salt grass (h&rba salee) showed 
itself in plats uncropped by game. Artemisief* or rather greasewood of 
the mountaineers, became quite abundant, as did absinthe, or wild sage, 
together with scverals specimens of the cadi family, which are the common 
pest of the mountain prairies. 

The purifying effects of saline exhalations, with the odor of the greasB- 
toood and absinihe of the prairies, plateaux and table lands, and the balsam 
and cedar of the adjacent mountains, aflbrded an atmosphere, even at this 
unfavorable season, as aromatic as the air of Eden ana as wholesome u 
the deathless clime of Elysium. 

Eastward lay a broad expanse of prairie, bounded only by the horizon, 
while westward and upon either hand, the high summits of the Black 
Hills, with their pines and snows, told our ingress to other and wiUer 
scenes. 

Our course for some twenty or twenty-five miles led through a broad 
valley, though occasionally winding among rugged hills of red-sandstone 
and primitive rock, with denuded sides and level summits, covered with 
shrubs and dwarfish pines. 

Towards night, on reaching a small stream, called Horse-shoe cnek, 
we struck camp. One of the party havmg killed a buck deer, we weie 
promptly on hand, and not at all backward in obeying the calls of appe* 
tite, sharpened by a continuous abstinence of three days. 

* Lt Fremont, in his report relative to the proceedings of the ezpaditkni of I84S, 
'd, and *4f has designated some three varieties of shruM by the general leim aits- 
miae, among which are greasewood and prairie sage. Although the latter an of 
the Hune fiunily, the diflerenoe in their appearance is so martbed, I have thooriit 
k proper to observe a nominal distinction, and for that imuMm, they are caHea Id 
soMeqoent pages by temw ftmiiiar to the moimtaineenk 



PRAIRIE D068. 149 

Deeivmeat at this season of the year is veiy poor eating,— especially 
that of the buck, — it being both lean and tough ; but, indifferent as it was, 
we were too hungry to be nice. 

Previous to reaching camp I rode along the base of a email mountain, 
some distance to the right of the main party, in quest of game ; there I 
caught glimpse of the first panther I had yet met with. Jumping from my 
horse, I thought to give him a passing shot^ — ^but he, neither liking my 
looks nor the smell of gunpowder, made hasty retreat to his mountain 
home. 

Passing leisurely on, my course led through a large village of prairie- 
dogs, which reminds me of having heretofore neglected a description of 
these singular animals. 

I am at a loss to imagine what it is in the habits or looks of the prairie- 
dog that entitles him to that appellation. 

In appearance and size he more approximates a large species of tihe 
seiurus family, commonly called the fox-squirrel, than anyU]ing I can name. 
His tail, however, is but^ an inch and a half Ion?, while his ears and legs 
are also short ; — as a whole, perhaps, he is a trifle larger and more corpu- 
lent than the fox-squirrel. His ** bark " is precisely like the occasional 
cbatterings of that animal, and his color is of a brownish red. 

His habits are quite inofiensive and lead him to procure his food from 
roots and grass. Clumsy in his motions, he seldom ventures far from 
home — feaif ul of the numerous enemies that beset him on all sides, both 
from birds and beasts of prey. 

These animals congregate together in large villages, and dig their bur- 
rows adjoining each other ; — ^the dirt thrown from them often forming cone- 
like elevations three or four feet high, in' whose tops are the entrances. 
The latter are nearly of a perpendicular descent for two feet, and then 
slope away to a great distance under ground. 

These villagers locate without regard to the vicinity of water, and it is 

gravely doubted, by many persons, wnether they make the same use of that 
uid as other animals ; — ^I have seen large settlements of them in high arid 
prairies, at a distance of fifteen or twenty miles from either stream or pool 
of water, and in regions subject to neither rain nor dews. 

They are keen of sight and scent, and seemed governed by some code of 
federative regulations for mutual safety. Their guards are regularly posted 
at the suburSs of every village, whose duty it is to be continually on the 
alert and give timely warning of the approach of danger. 

This the cautious sentinels discharge by standing erect at the slightest 
tainture of the air, or startling noise, or strange appearance ; and, having 
ascertained by careful observations its nature and cause, they sound the 
sharp yelp aqd chatter of alarm, in a hurried manner, — then, betaking 
themselves to the watch-towers that protect the entrances to their burrows, 
from the verge of the steep parapets they again renew their warning notes, 
when the whilom busy populace, bescattered at brief distances for amuse- 
ment or food, return with all possible despatch to their ready holes and dis- 
appear from view. 

The fiiithful sentinels are last to retreat from their posts, and not unfr^- 
Quently maintain their ground at the hazard of indiviaual safety. 

13* 



150 WILD SCENES. 

On the disappearance of the cause of alann, they are the first to oom- 
municate the pleasing intelligence, and soon the reassured community agam 
betak3 themselves to their business and sports. 

i'he prairie-owl and rattlesnake maintain friendly relations with these 
inoffjasive villagers, and not unfrequently the three heterogeneous associates 
occupy the same subterranean appartments; — a strange companionship of 
birdt;, beasts, and reptiles ! 

The prairie dog is extremely tenacious of life, and can seldom be killed 
with a rifie, unless by a brain-shot ; and then, even, it is difficult to secure 
him, as his compaoions will immediately convey the carcase into then- holes 
beyond reach. 

The flesh of these animals is tender and quite palatable, and their oil 
superior in fineness, and absence from all grosser ingredients, to that of 
«ny other known animals ; it is highly valued as a medicine in certain 
cases. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



The Creek valky. — The Platte as a mountain stream. — Canon. — Romantic prospect* 
—Comical bear story. — Perilous encounter with a wounded buU. — Geological ro- 
marks. — ^Division of party.— Safety of spring travel.— La Bonte's creek. — Remarks 
by the way. — Servioe-berry. — Deer Creek. — General observations. — Moccasin mak- 
ing. — Box-elder.— Bear killed. — Excellence of its flesh. — Difl&rent kmds of bean in 
Oregon and the mountains.- Tlie grizzly bear, his nature and habits. 

HoRSE-sHOE creek is a stream of considerable size, that traces its way 
through a broad valley of rich alluvion, well timbered with cottonwood and 
box-eider, and aflbrding all the usual varieties of mountain fruit The 
grass of the preceding year's growth was quite rank and stout, giving 
evidence of a fertile soil. 

Resuming our course, we again bore towards the river with the design 
of crossing, and, after a few hours' ride came to its banks, through a broad 
opening between two ridges of hills that communicated with it from the 
high prairies and table lands upon the left. 

llero, however, fording was impracticable, the stream being too high and 
the current swift. 

The Platte of the mountains retains scarcely one characteristic of the 
river with which the reader has hitherto become so fiimiliarized. It is bow 
confined to a bed of rock and gravel, not exceeding two hundred yards in 
width, and is of unwonted clearness and transparency. Its banks are 
steep, and the attrition of higli waters discloses a deep vegetable mould in 
their vicinity, favorable to the growth of grain or other produce. 

A small bottom of rich sandy loam upon the opposite side lay at the base 
of a high ridge of table lands, which presented its rugged sides of red- 



INTERESTING VIEW. 151 

8aiidst(»ie, almost vertical in their position, and ornamented with an occap 
Bionahstunted pine, or cedar, or shrub of the bnflBilo-beny, (thej^erdM aT- 
gentea,) while at their base reposed, in hage masses, a profuse medley of 
fallen fragments, strown around in all the wild confusion of savage 
scenery. 

A few hundred yards to the left, the Platte forces its way through a 
barrier of table lands, forming one of those striking pecuUarities incident 
to mountain streams, called a ^ canon. "^ 

Improving the opportunity afibrded by a short sUy, I ascended an emi- 
nence to enjoy a full vew of the grand spectacle. The mountain through 
which the river finds passage, at this place, is from five to eight hundred 
feet high, opposing perpendicular walls upon each side, that at many points 
overhang the narrow stream which sweeps with its foaming waters among 
the rocks below. 

This canon is nearly two miles in length. About midway of the dis- 
tance the whole stream is precipitated in an unbroken volume from a ledge 
of rocks, causing a cataract of some twenty or twenty-five feet descent. 

Standing upon the dizzy verge of this frightful chasm, and gazing 
adown its dark abyss, the aspect is one of terrific sublimity, and such an 
one as wiU cause the beholder to shrink back with instinctive dread ! 

These walls are principally of red-sandstone, and ferruginous rock, the 

frecise character of which I was unable to determine. Upon the summit 
noticed an abundance of silex, with some elegant specimens of crystal- 
line quartz, that, reflecting the sun's rays, shone like gems in the crown of' 
a mountain-god ; a number of singular ligneous petrifactions also met my 
observation, principally consisting of pine and cedar. 

The surrounding country brought within the scope of vision an interest- 
ing and romantic scene. The lofty table land in front (with diversified 
Burfu^es of granitic rock and vegetable earth, aflbrding a scanty nourish- 
ment for heroage and foothold for dwarfish cedars and pines) spread fiir 
away to the snow-clad mountains of the north,^-while rearward at its base 
lay the broad vaUey through which passes the Oregon trail, shut in upon two 
sides by rugged hills ; and &rther on arise the snowy sides of the Lara- 
mie chain, with their cloud-capped summits. To the left, p^ik towering 
above peak, in gradual succession, point to the ridge dividing the waters 
of the Atlantic and Pacific; and, to the right, the lessening eminences, 
vdUonst and plateaux, guide the eye to where the boundless prairie revels 
in wild beauty and owns itself the realm of eternal Solitude ! 

How magnificent must be the scene when spring arrays the surrounding 
landscape in her own loveliness, and bedecks the wilderness with gaudy 
verdure! 

Bearing again to the left, we continued our course by a winding 
baflyo-path which soon brought us to a broad valley bordering upon tJie 
Platte. 

*The Spanish word " canon" implies a narrow, tonnel-like pusage between ^^ 
and precipitous banks, formed by mountains or table lands. It is pronounced kantov, 
and IS a familiar term in the vocabulary of a mountaineer. 



162 OBSERVATION'S. 



Riding on, we soon c&me to a large sand creek ; and, observing sevenil 
bnlls in the vicinity, we accepted the advantage o^red by a smaU grove 
of cottonwoods and willows, with a clear spring, and struck camp. 

Daring the day, the oddity of an old Franco-Canadian, who accompa- 
nied us, afforded me considerable amusement. Observing that he had car- 
ried his gun uncharged for several days past, a circumstance so singular 
in this country led me to enquire the cause. The oLd fellow, with the most 
laughable sangfroid, answered as follows : 

*^ Me carry fusee load ? No, no ! monsieur. No good, carry fusee load 
8ur le printems. Certes, much bear come out — him dangereux. Me live 
long en le montagnes ; oui, no remarque— duo, tree, great many year! 
Sacre dem bear, — ^vat you call him en la AmericJLn 7" 

** Grizzly bear, I suppose you mean," said I. 

** Oui, oui, monsieur ; much graces, monsieur ! Oui, gizzle bear ; me 
parler bon Americ&n,que no remarque gizzle bear! entonner! Sacre dem 
gizzle bear, him come out une day, kill me de pres." 

" Well," continued I ; " what has that to do with carrying your gun un- 
loaded 7" 

*'Oai, oui; pardonner, monsieur. Me parler tel une bon American! 
Me reciter, sacre dem bear, — vat you call him, monsieur 7 Oh, gizzle 
bear ! Sacre dem gizzle bear, me see him une day, en le printems ; bi^, 
grand felleu. Shoot him fusee; make him much blood; no kill him. 
Sacre dem bear, ffizzle bear, him jump for me. ' Wa-r-r-h !* he say, (im- 
itating the bear.; Bon Dieu ! me no stay dare ; me bein fast run ; me 
abandonner la fusee ; me climb une leetil pine. Sacre dem bear — ^vat yon 
call him 7 Ah, oui, gizzle bear. Certes, monsieur, me parler bon Amer- 
ican, tel une nature! ! Sacre dem bear, him come to tree ; no climb him, 
—he too leetil. Look him all round, den ; sacre dem bear, gizzle bear did. 
See fusee lie ; pick him up; cock him fusee, sacre dem bear, gizzle bear 
did. Take him aim at me ; snap him fusee tree time. Oh, mon Dien ! 
mon Dieu ! Suppose him fusee been load I Tonnerre de bat^me ! Him 
shoot me; him kill me dead! sacre dem bear, dem gizzle bear vould! 
Certes, monsieur ; por le assure, sacre dem gizzle bear, him kill me ! en le 
vehte, monsieur, him kill me dead !" 

" So," resumed I, " your reason for not carrying your gun loaded is, you 
are fearful that a bear might chance to get hold of it and shoot you !" 

" Certes, monsieur ; en le verite ! No carry gun load, sur le printems. 
Sacre dem bear get 'old of him, he shoot !" 

Towards night, two of our party, who had gone in pursuit of bui&Io, 
returned laden with meat, which, though poor, was far preferable to the 
lean venison we had fed upon for the last twenty-four hours. 

The male bufialo, at this season of the vear, is generally fatter than 
&e female, unless it be one of the few barren cows that sometimes 
ue found in large bands; but, neither is worth boasting of. 

After our long &sting and indiflerent fare for six entire days, it is 
not marvellous that we improved, with quickened zest, the present op- 
poitomty of feasting. 



DIVISION OF PARTY. IW 

The day following, two parties started in quest of game,— one of which 
killed three buUs, at as many shots, within half an hour after leaving 
camp. 

The other party also kiUed two, but, in securing one of them, they met 
with an exciting adventure. 

Both animals were extended upon the ground, one entirely and the other 
apparently dead — ^the hunters, having butchered one of them, proceeded to 
the other, and were in the act of raising him to the right position for the 
commencement of operation. The old lellow, not relis^ng the Uke famil- 
iarity from new acquaintances, sprang to his feet, and made a plunge at 
the affirighted hunters, who only escaped the fatal charge by one of Siose 
admirable teats of quick dodging so otten in requisition among moun- 
taineers. 

The bull, passing between them, fell head foremost against the ground, 
two or three feet beyond the spot they had occupied scarcely a second 
previous; — ^then rising, with glaring eyes and distended nostrils, and 
mouth foaming with blood and rage, he pursued one of them in hot chase, 
for a distance of several hundred yards. So close was the bull in a few 
leaps, that with a sweep of his horns he gored the hunter's back, tearing 
away his pantaloons and coat, and prostrating him upon all-fours at the 
edge of a deep ravine, down which he tumbled ; — the enraged beast fol- 
lowed, but the force of an unbroken headway landed him, with a tremen- 
dous shock, against the opposite bank, feir beyond the hunter. Improve 
iDg the advantage thus ^iiied, tlie latter escaped through the windings of 
the ravine, and ascended the bank, without the reach ot his pursuer. 

Having prociued his rifle, after nine more shots had riddled the lights 
of the buU's carcase, the business of butchering was again commenced and 
terminated without further mishap. 

Our stay at this camp was prolonged for three or four days. 

The geological character of the vicinity corresponds very much with 
that previously remarked, and to describe it in full would seem too much 
like a repetition. I have, perhaps, said sufficient to give the reader a cor- 
rect idea of the prominent characteristics of these parts, and hence, for the 
sake of brevity, shall hereafter forbear further notes upon this subject, 
unless some uniform change or striking peculiarity should call for a 
passing observation. 

Prior to resuming our journey, a disagreement occurred between us rel- 
ative to the propos^ route. 

Some were desirous of proceeding southward into the Plains of Larap 
mie ; thence, bearing eastward to Laramie river, following its valley to Fort 
P]atte ; — others were anxious to continue up the Platte to Sweet Water, or 
further, and from thence proceed as circumstances or incHnation might 
surest. 

This difS>rence finally resulted in a division of the party, — four in 
favor of the western, and three of the southern route, — myself being iii- 
duded with the former. 

Selecting two pack-mules for the conveyance of provisioiui and can^ 



154 MOCCASIN MAKING. 



W1 



[uipage, the day following we mounted our horses and were under way. 
the exception of myself, the present party consisted of old and ex- 
perienced mountaineers, well acquainted with the country and the nature 
of Indians. Though, in regard to the latter, little danger was apprehen- 
ded at this season of the year, as the Sioux had not yet left their winter 
quarters, and they rarely traverse the vicinity of Sweet Water before the 
middle of May. Other tribes we might look upon as friendly. We, 
therefore, anticipated a safe and pleasant excursion. 

During the day our course led over a rough undulating prairie, bounded 
on the right mostly by the river, and on the left by the mountains. 

In the heads of valleys and ravines I noticed numerous withered stalks 
of the bread-root, (psordlea escvlerUa^ indicating its great abundance, and 
also an increased quantity of absinlhe. 

At night we encamped at the fprks of a small stream called La Bonte's 
creek. Near the confluence of its waters with the Platte are the remains 
of a log cabin, occcupied by a trading party several years since. 

The creek is tolerably well timbered, and the valley, through which it 
winds its way, aflbrds many beautiful bottoms of rich soil. The rock in 
the vicinity disclosed a furruginous character, especially the sandstone. 

Among the usual fruit-bearing shrubs and bushes, I here noticed the 
" service berry." 

This kind of fruit is very abundant in the mountainons parts of Oregon, 
where it attains a size but little inferior to the common plum, and is highlj 
esteemed for its superior flavor. 

Leaving La Bonte's creek, we travelled by easy stages, for three suo* 
cessive days, and struck camp at the mouth of Deer creek. 

Our course led over several beautiful streams, most of them well tim- 
bered with cottonw6od and box-elder, and occasionally skirted by rich bot- 
toms. Previous to teaching this point we followed along the Platte valley, 
for a distance of some twenty or thirty miles, which presented several fine 
bottoms of rich sandy soil upon either bank, together with numerous 
groves of cottoiyiiH)od. 

The face ot- the country is generally a succession of ridges and hol- 
lows, intersected by ravines ana small streams of water. 

At Deer creek, and for some distance before reaching it, the mountain 
chain to our left approaches within four or five miles of the river, rising 
abruptly to a height of from eight to fifleen hundred feet, with frowning 
brows and pine-ciad summits. 

Deer creek is one of the largest affluents of the Platte, from the south, 

between Sweet Water and Laramie. At this place it is about eight yards 

broad, with a smooth and transparent current that sweeps over a bed of 

rock and gravel. Its banks are well timbered with large cottonwoods, and 

' present rich bottoms of alluvial soil, very luxuriant in grass. 

Even this early in the season, the fresh ^^rass of the vicinity aflbrds tempt- 
ing nourishment for our animals, and wishing to favor them as much as 
possible, we have concluded to remain a short time. 

During the succeeding interval we were variously occupaed in hunting, 
Toot-diggmg, and moccasin-making. The latter ia a businesK in wlti^ 



A FEAST OF BEAR MEAT. 1M» 

every mountaineer is necessarily a proficient, and rarely will he ventare 
upon a long joum*3y without the appurtenances of his profession. 

The process of shoe-fnaking with him is reduced to its most simple form. 
He merely takes two pieces of buflalo (or any other suitable) skin, each 
being a little longer and wider than his foot, particularly towards the 
heel; tliese he folds separately, and lays them together parallel with the 
turned edges ; then, rounding and trimming the sides, to render them foot- 
shaped, with an awl and tiie sinew of buflalo or other animal, or small 
strips of thin deer-skin, ('* whang,") he sews the vamps from end to end, — 
then after cutting a tongue-like appendage in the upper side, midway from 
heel to toe, and stitching together the posterior parts, his task is done. 

Having obtained a quantity of sap from a grove of box-elders near 
camp, we found it a sweet and pleasant liquid, and not inferior to that of 
maple. Sugar might be manufactured frran it, with little trouble. 

The leaves of this tree, as well as the general appearance of its wood, 
greatly assimilate those of maple, and, independent of its bushy tope and 
stunted, winding growth, it would be hard to tell the difierence at a firat 
glance. 

Game was plenty on every side, both buf&lo, deer, and elk, with some 
few bear. 

The second day after our arrival, one of the latter, attracted by the scent 
of fresh buflalo meat, ventured within gun-shot of camp. Instantly the 
balls of four rifles were buried in his carcase. Aroused by ttdsfsding 
salute, he rushed towards us at the top of his speed, when our horses, 
aflrighted at the strange appearance, broke snorting away over the neigh- 
boring hills, and we ourselves took to trees as fast as possible. 

In the midst of this general consterDatioi^ a pistol ball, fired by one of 
the party, buried itself in the brains of our troublesome visitor and laid him 
prostrate. 

He was one of a species common to the mountains, called the red bear, 
and must have weighed four or five hundred pounds. The fat upon his 
back was full three inches thick His skin wiien stretched would have 
compared in size to that of a buflalo, and the claws of his feet were full three 
inches long. 

At this season of tl\e year, when these animals first leave their dens, 
tney are much the fattest, — a singular circumstance, if we remember the 
tact of their remaining holed up for the entire winter, without eating ! 

After butchering the greasy victim, and bringing our erratic horses back 
10 camp, we regaled ourselves with an ample feast of bear's liver, heart, 
and kidneys, basted with fat, — a dish that epicures might well covet 
Then, filling a large camp-kettle with portions of the " fleece " and ribs, 
we allowed it to boil till tiie next morning, and thus prepared another deli- 
cious entertainment, such as is rarely met with in any* country other than 
this. 

Bear meat, to bo tender and good, should be boiled at least ten hours. 
This is probably the most preferable mode oi cooking it, though a roast of 
the article is far from bad. 

There are four several varieties of bear found in the Rocky Mountains 



IM NATURE AND HABITS OF THE GRIZZLY BEAR. 

and coantries adjacent, viz. : The grizzly bear, the black, the red, and the 
white. 

Of these, the grizzly bear stands |>re eminent in ferocity and strength. 
He will almost invariably flee at the sight or scent of a man, and seldom 
attacks any one unless wounded. When shot, he generally runs at full 
■peed towards the sound, and woe to the unfortunate hunter who then 
comes in his way, unless fully prepared for a deadly encounter ! 

This animal reisos prince of the mountains, and every other beast within 
his wide realm acknowledffes his supremacy. 

Wolves and panthers &te not approach hira, or disturb aught savoring 
of his ownership. Even the carcase of his prey, covered with the earth 
and rock his cautious instinct teaches him to heap upon it for preservation, 
is unmolested, though hundreds of wolves and panthers might be starving 
around. 

Buffalo dread his presence far more than the dangerous approach of 
the hunter, and will sooner bring into requisition their swiftest powers of 
flight on such occasions. With great cUfficulty a horse can can be per* 
siuded to go within any near distance of one of them, even when led, and 
then he will quail and tremble in evenr joint, from extreme terror. 

In short, the grizzly bear stalks forth at pleasure, in his majesty and 
strength, lord of the wild solitudes in which he dwells, and none dares op* 
pose him. 

Some writers assert that bears will not prey upon dead carcases,— 4hi8 
is contrary to fact I have often known them take possession of the 
carcases of animals, even when nearly putrid, and remain until they were 
devoured. ' 

They frequently kill buflklo, horses, and cattle to gratify their taste for 
animal food, and, in such cases, always drag their prey to some convenient 
spot, and perform the task of burial by heaping upon it piles of rock or 
earth, to a depth of seyeral feet, for protection against the voracity of other 
beasts of prey. It is not uncommon, even, that they drag the entire carcase 
of a full-grown bull a distance of several hundred yards, by the horns, for 
this purpose^ — so great is their strength and so accute their sagacity. 



I. ., V 



^ ^ W k 



•• • « • 



•• b b » 



U9 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Deeperate encounter with a grizzly beer, and extraorduuuy instance of mSBnag,-^ 
Close contest. — ^A comical incident — Cross Platte.~-Canon camp.-~Sage tiees.— 
Moontain sheep, and all about them.-~Independence Rock ; why so called, and 
description of it — Devil's Gate.— Landscape scenery. 



The adventure recorded in the preceding chapter called forth the 
hearsal of many thrilling stories of frightful encounter with that proad 
monarch of the mountains, the grizzly bear. Two or three of these it may 
not be uninteresting to transcribe. 

Several years since, an old trapper by the name of Glass, with his com 
panion, while on an excursion, came upon a large grizzly bear. 

Bruin, having received the salute of two rifles, as u6ual, rushed towarcjft' 
his uncivil assailants, who broke from him with all possible despatch. But 
Glass, stumbling, fell prostrate in his flight, and before he could recover his 
feet the infuriated beast was upon him. 

Now commenced a death-struggle. The pistols of the hunter were both 
discharged in quick succession,--&e ball of one entering the breast of his 
antagonist, and that of the other grazing his back. 

Smarting and maddened by the pain of additional wounds, the bleeding 
monster continued the conflict with the fury of desperation, — tearing from 
the limbs and body of the unfortunate man large pieces of trembling flesh, 
and lacerating him with the deep thrusts of his teeth and claws. 

Meanwhile the sufferer maintained, with his buteher-knife, an obstinate 
defence, though with fast waning efi&rt and strength. Finally, enfeebled 
by the loss of blood, and exhausted from the extraordinary exertions of a 
desperate and unequal contest, he was unable to oppose further resis- 
tance, and quietly resigned himself to his fate. 

The bear, too, with the thick blood oozing from his numerous wounds, 
and feilnt from the ^j^y stabs among his veins and sinews, seemed 
equally in fiivor of a suspension of hostilities ; and, extending himself 
across the hunter's back, hct remained motionless for two hours or 
more. 

But now another enemy commences an assault upon his vitals — that 
enemy is death. In vain is defensive efllbrt. In vain are all his struggles. 
He falls by the hunter's side a lifeless corse. 

The setting sun had cast his lurid glare upon the ensanguined spot, aa 
the comrade of the miserable Glass ventured near to ascertain the result 
of the fierce encounter. 

There lay the body of his deserted friend, stretched out, apparently life- 
less and half-torn to pieces ; and, by its side, lay tibe carcase of that ene- 
my, which had waged with it such murderous war, cold and stiflened in 
deathl 

Now, doubly terrified at his loneliness, but still governed by sordid mo- 



160 A CLOSE CONTEST. 

tives, he strifyped the former of his arms and every other valnahle, then no 
longer needed (as he supposed) hy their owner, and, mounting his horse, 
started immediately for the nearest trading po^ 

On his arrival he recounted the particulars of the fatal occurrence, — 
carefully concealing, however, his own criminal conduct The story was 
accredited, and the name of Glass found place upon the long catalogue of 
those who had fallen a prey to wild beasts and savage men. 

Six weeks elapsed and no one thought of the subject of oar sketch as 
among the living. The general surprise, therefore, may be readily imag- 
ined, on opening the fort-gates one morning, at finding before them the 
poor, emaciated form of a man, half-naked, and covereawith wounds and 
runninff sores, and so torn the fieshless bones of his legs and thighs were 
exposed to view in places ! and how this astonishment was heighten- 
ed on recognizing the person of Glass in the illy defined lineaments of his 
countenance — the very man so long regarded as the inhabitant of another 
world ! A veritable ghost suddenly appearing upon the spot could not have 
occasioned greater wonder ! 

But, sensations of pity and commiseration quickly succeeded those of 
surprise, and the unhappy sufferer was conveyed within doors and received 
from the hands of friends that careful attention his situation so much re- 
quired. 

The Btiory of his misfortunes was thrillinffly interesting. When left by 
his companion for dead, he was in a state of unconsciousness, with scarce- 
ly the breath of life retained in his mangled body. But, the soft night- 
wind stanched his wounds, and a slight sleep par^ally revived him iSom 
his death-like stupor. 

With the morning, the slight sensations of hunger he began to ex- 
perience were appeased from the raw flesh of the carcase at his side ; 
and, thus strengthened, by a slow and tedious efibrt he was enabled to 
reach a near stream and quench his thirst. Still further revived, he 
again crawled to the carcase at the demands of appetite. 

In this manner he continued for three days, when the putrescent 
corse compelled him to abandon it. 

Then it was he commenced his tedious return to the fort, (some 
seventy miles distant,) which he performed during an interval of forty 
successive days ! The whole of this long stretch tie crawled upon his 
hands and knees, — subsisting, for the meanwhile, only upon insects, such 
as chance threw in his way, but passing most of the time without one 
morsel with which to appease the gnawings of hunger or renew his 
wasted strength. 

Yet, great as were his sufierings and intolerable as they may seem, 
he survived them all, and, by the kind attention of friends, soon recov- 
ered. 

He still lives in the town of Taos, New Mexico, and frequently re- 
peats to wondering listeners the particulars of this terrific and painful 
adventure. 

One of our party, whose right hand was much disabled from the eflects 
of a wound, now told his story. 
For several years succeeding his first arrival in the Rocky Mountains, 



A COMICAL INCIDENT. 161 

he had permitted no opportunity of killing any one of the varioiu species 
of bear, common to these regions, to pass unimproved. Never did he think 
of fearing them, and was always the last to retreat in case of a charge. 

When a bear appeared within any reasonable shooting distance of 
our hunter, it almost invariably fell a victim to his unerring aim. But, ere- 
long, this spirit of bold-daring proved the source of lasUng regret to its 
possessor. 

On the occasion alluded to, having shot at one of these animals, contra- 
ry to his usual good luck, he only wounded it. 

The bear in turn now became the assailant, but received the contents of 
two pistols before it had time to advance far. Our hunter at this crisis 
sprang to a neighboring pine, which he commenced climbing. His pursu- 
er, saining the tree almost as soon, likewise began its ascent 

Here occurred a struggle between them — die man to force his way up- 
wards, and the bear to prevent him. The former, drawing his butcher- 
knife, thrust it at the eyes and nose of his antagonist. Not fancying buch 
wjinied hints upon adeucate subject, Mr. Bruin caught hold of the hunter's 
nand, and, as an earnest of deep sensitiveness, crushed it between his teeth, 
— ^nor even then relinquished the gripe. Transferred to the left hand, the 
knife continued its work, till the sickening beast commenced sliding down- 
ward — dragging the poor hunter also to the ground. Both struck at the 
same time ; but, at that instant, the knife of the latter pierced the heart of 
his antagonist, and laid him dead at his feet 

The unfortunate man, however, lost two of his fingers in the a£&ay, and 
his hand was otherwise so much injured he has never since recovered its 
use. 

Another story related at the same time, though not possessing the deep 
and thrilling interest of the preceding ones, partakes a little of the ludircous, 
and will doubtless amuse the reader. 

The narrator a while since formed one of a trapping party, with which 
he proceeded to the Utah country. While there, on a certain occasion, 
having set his traps over night, he returned to examine them the next 
morning, in quest of beaver, and, to his surprise, one of them was missing. 
After cautiously examining the premises, under the impression that some 
lurking Indians had stolen his trap with its contents, he noticed the tracks of 
bears, near by, which served at once to unravel the whilom mystery of its 
disappearance. 

He now began to muse upon his loss, as, without the missing trap, his 
set would be rendered incomplete, and, under present circumstances, the 
want of the thing was more than the worth of it. While thus ruminating, 
a slight noise, among neighboring cherry-bushes and cottonwood, caught 
his ear, which sounded like some one beating with two sticks. 

This induced him to approach for the purpose of ascertaining the cause, 
when an opening revealea to view Mr. Bruin seated upon a log and hold- 
ing to his face the missing trap, tightly clasped to his fore-paw. 

The bear appeared to be regaining the strange instrument with doee 
attention, as if to study into the principles of its construction ;-^now gazing 
at it endwise, then bringing its side in close proximity to his eyes ; then 
taming it over to examine the opposite one ; — ^now, he would essay i*^* 

14* 



IW HUlfTlNG CAMP. 

fltreneth, and lightly tape it apon the log. But this is a painful opeiatio%— 
iie reunqnishes it, and resumes his former grotesque movements. 

Watching this curious performance, the trapper could scarcely retain 
bis gravity, or master his fondness for the ludicrous sufficiently for the in- 
tencted shot He did, however, and the comedy was suddenly transformed 
to a tragedy, by leavmg its acUnr struggling in death. 

A light fall of snow during the last of our stay at Deer ereek. Tendered 
the ground quite muddy and soft ; notwithstanding which we resumed our 
course early in the morning of the fourth day. 

Continuing on, a ride of thirty miles brought us to the place where the 
Oregon trail crosses the Platte ; and, after fonling the river, we encamped 
upon the opposite side. 

The stream, at this point, is about three hundred yards from bank to 
bank, and, at the time of our crossing it, swimming deep for a small por* 
tion of the way. 

In ordinary stages, the water is but little over three feet deep, and the 
ford perfectly safe and practicable. The partial melting of the mountain 
mows had increased the size and velocity of its current, and rendered our 
passage slightly dangerous and difficult. The bed appeared to be rocky, 
and in some places rough,— requiring much caution in crossing waggons, 
to prevent them from overturning. 

On the third day following, we arrived at another remarkable canon, after 
travelling a distance of thirty-five or forty miles. Here, finding large 
numbers of mountain sheep, we were induced to remain a short time. 

Our course for most of this distance was confined to the valley of the 
Platte, on account of the greater supply of wood found upon its banks. 

Towards noon of the first day, we passed a point, called the " Red 
Buttes," at which the river cuts its way through a Iqtty ridge of hills. 
This passage left a considerable bank upon both sides, shut in bv abrupt 
walls of red argillaceous sandstone, towering to the height of several 
hundred feet 

The soil was generally a mixture of clay and sand, and, in some places, 
afibrded a reddish loam which appeared to oe very rich. 

A short ride from the " Red ]Buttes " took us across a beautifid stream, 
with a broad bottom, well timbered with cottonwood. 

Large herds of buffido were continually in sight upon the whole route. 

Several miles previous to reaching the caSon,mv notice was first attracted 
to the extraordinary size attained by ttie wild sage ; it having mer|;ed its shrub* 
like appearance into that of trees varying firom five to ten feet m height and 
from twenty to twenty-five inches in circumference at the root. 

The magnificent dimensions of this herb are retained for a large extent 
isi territory to the south and west of this vicinity. It is frequently made 
Hse of for fire-wood, and the prairies, in many places, are covered with 
Deautiful groves of it^ — ^perfuming the atmosphere and revelling in peren- 
1^ verdure. 

. The canon before referred to, is caused hf the river passing through a 
Sain of hills, for a reach of nearly half a nule. 



MOUNTAIN SHEEP. KK( 

The CQirent is here shut in by banks of perpendicular rock, fonr or fire 
hnndred feet high, which sometimes overhangit, and leave a narrow apace 
of scarcely two hundred feet for its bed. These consist principally of 
white cretaceous sandstone, soft and friable, and frequently present to view 
the appearance of regular mason-worL 

During our stay we succeeded in killing five mountain sheep. Some of 
diese were very large and quite &t. 

The flesh of this animal is equal io, flavor to that of buffido. It is gener- 
ally in ^ood order, tender and sweet, and sUghtly assimilates our ^^MTftiffor* 
muttcm in taste. 

The habits and appearance of mountain sheep resemble those of ao 
other animal. 

They select for their favorite habitatiim the rugged fastnesses of wild and 
inaccessiUe mountains. In the cold of winter, they descend to some of 
the numerous valleys that so beautifully diversify the scenerv of these re- 
gions, where the verdure of spring so rarely 6ules ; and, as the warm sea* 
son advances, they commence their return towards the loftv snow- 
peaks, keeping even progress with spring and fresh flowers along the 
mountain-6ides. 

Theirs is a life of unbroken spring— beauty and grandeur an their 
dwelling place, — and, 'mid the awe-inspiring sublimity of nature's works^ 
is their lioine. They gambol upon the fearful verge of the steep clifl^ or 
climb its perpendicular sides, bidding defiance to all pursuers. There, 
secure from enemies, they rear their young, and teach them to leap from 
craff to crag in mirthful gaiety, or traverse Uie dizzy heights in quest of the 
varied sweets of changeful spring. 

Tliese animals are remarkably acute of sight, and quick of seent and 
hearing. The least noise or tainture of the air excites tfaeur attentioD ami 
places them instantly upon the alert Mounting upon some hi^ rock, 
they will stand for hours in the same posture, gazing in the direction of 
the fancied danger. If fully satisfied of its reality,* they abandon their 
position for another and a safer one, high among more rugged peaks, and 
oiften beyond the possibility of ofl&nsive approach. Their hue is so akin 
to tiiiat of the rocks which grace their range, the^ are with difficulty 
identified when standing motionless, and the hunter is constantly liable to 
mistake the one for the other. 

In size the mountain sheep is lai]jger than the domestic animal of that 
name^ and its general appearance is in every respect dissimilar—excepting 
the bead and horns. The latter appendage, however, alike belongs to the 
male and female. The horns of Uie female are about six inches long, 
small, pointed, and scmiewhat flat, — ^but those of the male grow to an eiMM'- 
mous size. I have frequently killed them having horns that measm^ two 
feet and a half or three feet in length, and from eighteen to nineteen inches 
in circumference at the base. 

These ponderous members are of great service to their owner in descend- 
ing the abrupt precipices, which his habits so often render necessajy. In 
leaping from an elevation he uniformly strikes upon the curve of his norns, 
and tlius saves himself from the shock of a sud<fen and violent contussion. 

The color of these animals varies from a yellowish white, to a dark 



IW DEVIL'S GATE. 

brown, or even black* A strip of snowy whiteness extends from ham to 
ham, including the taO, which is short and tipped with black. 

Instead of wool, they are covered with hair, which is shed annnally. 
Their cry is much like that of domestic sheep, and the same natural odor 
is common to both. 

It is extremely difficult to capture any of them alive, even while youn^, 
— and it is next to impossible to make them live and thrive in any otJur 
'Ciiinate than their own. Hence, the mountain sheep has never yet tbund 
a. place in our most extensive zoological collections. 

Remaining three days at this place, we were again en route, and, bear- 
ing to the right, passed over a ridge of rough, rocky summits, and struck 
the valley of the Sweet Water. Continuing up the latter, a short ride 
brought us to the vicinity of a noted landmark of the country, known as 
Independence Rock, where we encamped. 

The soil of the river bottoms is good, but the adjoining prairies are 
sandy and somewhat sterile. 

The distance from this to the canon is not 'fiaj firom twenty-three miles. 

Independence Rock is a solid and isolated mass of naked granite, situated 
about three hundred yards from the right bank of the Sweet Water. It 
covers an area of four or five acres, and rises to a height of nearly three hun- 
dred feet The general shape is oval, with the exception of a slight depres- 
sion in its summit where a scanty soil supports a few shrubs and a 
solitary dwarf-pine. 

It derives its name from a party of Americans on their way to Oregon, 
under the lead of one Tharp, who celebrated the fourth of July at this 
place, — ^they being the first company of whites that ever made the jour- 
ney from the States, via Sou^ Pass. 

The sur&ce is covered with the names of travellers, traders, trap- 
pers, and emigrants, engraven upon it in almost every practicable part, for 
the distance of many feet above its base,— but most prominent among them 
all is the word ^ Independence," inscribed by the patriotic band who first 
christened this lonely monument of nature in honor of Liberty's birthday. 

I Went to the rock for the purpose of recording my name with the 
swollen catalogue of others traced upon its sides ; but, having glanced over 
the strange mSiley, I became disgusted, and, turning away, resolved, " If 
there remains no other mode cf immortalizing myself, I will be content to 
descend U) the grave ' unhonored and unsung.^ " 

The day following, a heavy fall of snow and sleet forced us to remain 
in camp, and the consequent muddiness of the route prolonged our stay 
stiU further. 

The vicinity afibrded an abundance of game and a sufficiency of dry fuel ; 
it would, therefore, have been folly in us to care for wind or weather, 
detracting as did either so little from our comfort. 

During this interval I rode into the prairie a short distance, in quest of 
game, and struck the river a few miles above camp, at a place where tlie 
stream cuts its way through a high ridge of hills, forming ahother cauoii 



RETURI9 ROUTEL 166 

of three or four hundred yank in length and about forty faroady called the 
Devil's Gate, as I afterwards ascertained. 

ItB walls arose perpendicularly to a height of between four and &7e hun- 
dred feet, and consisted of trap rock, sandstone, and granite. 

Dismounting, I ascended to the summit, where a grand and picture«iiie 
scenery burst upon the view. 

Above, the broad valley of the Sweet Water stretched far away to the 
westward, bounded on either side by frowning mountains, that, towering 
to the height of fifteen hundred or two thousand feet, present their snowy 
sununits in proud defiance of wind or storm, and laugh at the impotency 
of a summer's sun ; — on the soutJi, shaking their piny tops in scornful 
derision ; and, on the north, with denuded crests of broken granite, chal» 
lenging the lightnings of heaven and wooing its loudest thundere ;— while 
furUier along, the clouds played in humble sportiveness around the base of 
the great chain dividing the waters of two oceans, nor dared ascend its 
dizzy heights to range amid eternal snow. 

Below, in silent grandeur, arose to view the grantic mass that responds 
to the day-da^wn of a nation's existence, surmounted by its lone pine, and 
bearing upoa its broad register the sculptured names of the audacious 
disturters of its solitude ; and further yet, the parti-colored peaks of the 
Black Hills, now white with fresh-fallen snow, now darkened with clus- 
tering pines, seemed musing in modest retirement ; while fiur around, in 
every spot accessible to discriminating vision, dense herds of grazing buf- 
fido covered the prairie with their pall-like mantle of countless numberai 

It was indeed a magnificent prospect, and needed only the garnishing 
hand of spring to render it at as enchanting in loveliness as it was impres- 
sive in v^d sublimity. 



CHAPTER XV. 



Eetum route.— Oregon trail from Independence Rock throngh the South PaM.— 
Citws the Sweet Water and Platte. — Mountain Fowl.— Journey up Medicine 
Bow.— Dangerous country. — A fight with the Sioux.— The " Careague."— A. tur* 
priae.— Visit to the Crow village. — ^Number and character of the Crow nation — > 
SelHng a prisoner for tobacco.— Description of Laramie Plains. 

Previotjsly to leaving this place, considerable discussion arose rebitivo 

to our future course. 

The proposition was to continue up the Sweet Water valley to the 
dividinffridge at the head of Green river, and return by the same rou^ ;— 
tersusttie suggestion to cross the Sweet Water and proceed up the Platte 
to the confluence of a large tributary from the south ; thenQs.pkeeping by 
the valley of nhe latter stream a? far as tlie Medicine Bow Mountains, re 
tarn to the Fort by the way of Laramie river. 



196 YIGINnY OF 1«E MEDICINE BOW. 

The fBLBt melting of the 8iiow« and anticipated difllciilties, not to 0tf 
dangers, conaeqaent upon high water in the passage of creeks and wren, 
influenced ns to adopt the latter as the most advisable course. 

Such was the final decision, and, the men with me being fiuniliaiiy 
■cqnainted with every nook and corner of the adjacent country, I improved 
the opportunity to elicit from them all possible information relative to the 
Oregon route from this onward ; and, never having personally travelled 
frnn Independence Rock to the head ef Green river, it may not be out of 
place to lay before the reader a saccinct statement of some of the toas 
thus gleaned. 

The distance from this point to the famous South Pass is but little over 
one hundred miles. The trail follows the Sweet Water to its source, 
keeping the river valley for most of the distance. This vaUey consists of 
an undulating prairie, (at intervals rough,) varying in width from the 
narrow limits ot a few yards to the more ample dimensions of four or five 
miles. 

Sometimes, the adjoining hills dose in upon the river banks and force 
the trail among their rugg^ windings. In one place the road leads over a 
high stretch of table land for nearly a day's travel, when it again descends 
to the valley. 

The stream, in places, is tolerably well timbered with cottonwood, oak| 
and aspen, and rolls over a rocky bed, with a clear and swift current 

The distance through the pass is about fifteen miles, and the ascent 
and descent are so gradual the traveller would scarcely notice the transi- 
tion from tlie head of the, Sweet Water to that of the Colorado. The hills 
at this point are low, and the face of the country rolling — but not rou|^ 
aflK>rding at all times a most excellent waggon road. 

On the morning of the fourth day, we accordingly retraced our course, 
and, having traversed a rugged and hilly country for some ten or twelve 
miles, we camped in a small open prairie at the mouth of the Sweet 
Wat r. 

During our ride we noticed several large bands of wild sheep, at inter- 
vals, gazing upon us from huge masses of granite that towered with 
isolat^ summits to a frequent tutitude of sixty or one hundred feet. 

The next morning, we crossed the Sweet Water a little above iti 
mouth. 

The ford was quite feasible, the stream being some ten yards wide and 
three or four feet deep, with a bed of sand and pebbles. 

From this point, travelling up tiie Platte for about ten miles or more, 
we arrived opposite the creek previously alluded to, and, crossing at a shoal 
place a short distance above, camped in a grove of cottonwood and 
willows, at ihe delta formed by the confluence of the two streams. 

There are several bottoms of very rich soil in this vicinity ; but back 
from the river the country is rough and hilly. 

Westward the Sweet Water mountains, distant some ten miles, showed 
their cra^^ey peaks, and to the north and east the piny crests of the Black 
Hills buretupon the sight ; while southward, a succession of high, roUi9g 
prairies opened to view a variety of romantic and beautiful scenery. 




A CkOW WabbiOk.— i^ ua. 



A TIGHT WITH THE SIOUX. 169 

We remained at this place the two following days, for the purpose of 
hunting. Grame of all kinds appeared in great abundance, particularly 
elk. At several points among the willows near the river were noticed 
fresh signs of beaver, and among the hills the recent marks of bear in 
digging for roots. 

A large bird called the mountain fowl, quite common to these parts, was 
the occasion of some little curiosity, beiu^ the first of its species I ever 
saw. This bird is rather larger than our domestic hen, and of a grayish 
brown color. Little accustomed to the presence of man, it easily faUs a 
prey to the hunter. Its flesh is tender and most excellent in flavor. 

Having obtained a fresh supply of meat, we resumed our course. 

Continuing up the right bamk of the creek (which I have named Medi« 
cine Bow, for lack of a better term) and travelling by easy stages four 
successive days, we arrived at its head, — a distance of more than fifty 
miles above its junction with the Platte. 

Many beautiful bottoms skirted the banks of this stream, which were 
well timbered with cotton wood, aspen, birch, willow, box-elder, and some 
few pines. The soil is generally of a reddish loam, and the luxuriant size of 
the aead grass, together with the rank verdure of the present season, gave 
evidence of its richness and fecundity. 

I was pleased to observe not a few wild flowers, of rare beauty, in full 
bloom, lending their fragrance to the breath of spring, and blushing at the 
iCdmiration challenged by their loveliness. 

On the right lay a broad expanse of undulating prairie, covered with 
stately clusters of absinthe, and disclosing every variety of soil, from the 
rude sterility of an African desert to the rich product veness of a garden }— 
on the left, the mountains, increasing in altitude, jutted their craggy sides 
in close pipximity to the creek — now disclosing immense piles of granite^ 
with red argillaceous, grayish micaceous, dark ferruginous, ana white 
calcareous sandstone, limestone, and coarse-grained conglomerates, naked 
and variegated with almost every diversity of color, — and now, surmounted 
by stunted pines and cedars, or towering balsam, hemlock and pinicA ; 
and in front, the lofty peaks of Medicine Bow, rearing tlieir snowy heads 
beyond the clouds, opposed an eternal barrier to further prospect. 

As we passed along, I noticed three or four small branches that emptied 
into the creek from the opposite side, and, just before reaching our present 
encampment, we crossed three others from the right, all of them well tim- 
bered and graced by rich valleys and prairiUons, 

This section of country, being the great war-ground between the Sioux 
and Chyennes on the one side, and the Snakes and Crows on the other, is 
considered dangerous, particularly from May till November of each yean 
During that time it is extremely unsafe for a white man to venture within 
its coimnes, unless protected by a strong force. 

A small creek at our right, became the scene of a bloody tragedy two 
months subsequent to our visit. 

Three trapoers, with whom I became acquainted upon my return to the 
Fort, tempted by the abundance of fur-bearing game common to the 
vicinity, came here for the purpose of making a summer hunt. While 
successfully pursuing their occupation, unsuspicious of inunediate danger, 

15 



170 LAlLA IilR PA8S. 

they were tiiddeiily surrounded, eaily one morning, by a w&rHMurty of Smmiz, 
whose first salute was a discharge of fire-anns, acoonpaBied by a diower 
of arrows and the sharp thunder of deafening ydls. 

Two of them feU dead. The remaining ooe retreated to a hoUow tree, 
dose at hand, into which he crawled; and, though severely wounded, 
naintained from it an obstinate resistance till near sundown, — ^keeping at 
bay the whole host of savage assailants, and thinning their numbers, one 
by one, with the deadly disdiarffe of his unerring rifle. 

Six warriors lay stinened in death, and as many more had felt the bnm> 
ing smart of wounds,— -one of the latter having had his tongue shot out, close 
to its roots !»and still he continued the unequal contest 

His triumph would have been complete had not the lemorselees crew, as 
a kst resort, set fire to the woods and burned him fimn the shell-like fc»^ 
tress irom which they could not drive him. 

He fell with his companions, mining his own blood with diat of tli^ 
murderers ; and the scalps of the tm«e were treasured among the honrid 
tropes of savage victory. 

Uf these unfortunate men, one, named Wheeler, was a Pennsylvanian ; 
another, named Cross Eagle, was a Swede; and the third, name not re- 
membered, was a native of France. They were men of noble hearts and 
much esteemed by all who knew them. 

In the neighborhood I noticed many indications of coal, of which therd 
appeared to be extensive beds, as well as iron and mineral salts. 

Continuing on, a short ride brought us to the pass-trail, following which, 
after trevelling a few miles by a road intercepted by fi^uent ravines be* 
tween a defile of mountains, we were finally ushered into the broad prairie, 
opening eastward, knovm as the Plains of Laramie. 

The mountains upon both sides were heavily coated with snow, which 
intruded to the trail, while groves of pine and aspen relieved the eye in 
scanning their rough escarpments. 

The prevailing rock app^ired to be a compact red granite, with occasional 
strata cSf sandstone. 

While winding among the ravines and aspen groves, we obtained an in- 
distinct view of a strange-looking, dark-colored animal, that my companions 
pronounced a ** carcc^ue,^^ 

Of the character, or even the existence of such a creature, I cannot 
speak from positive knowledge — this, if one, not being sufficiently near for 
a scrutinizing observation, and no other of its kind ever came in my way ; 
but, in answer to inquiries, I am enabled to mve the following description, — 
for the correctness of which, however, I will not vouch, though, for my own 
pail inclined to accredit it 

The *' carcague " is a native of the Rocky Mountains, and of a fiunily 
and species found in no other part of the world as yet known. He seems 
a distinct genus, partaking the mixed nature of the wolf and bear, but is &r 
more ferocious than either. 

His color is a jet black, hair long and coarse, and body trim and slender. 
His head and neck are like those of a wolf^ but his tail and feet assimilate 
he bear, and his body presents the marked qualities and appearance of both* 



A SimFBlSE. 171 

haWy he is coBsiderabhr lai|rer dan the common cm^og, and is more 
agUe in his movements. Unlike the bear, he will not nin from the presence 
or seent of man, and regards the '*kmi of creation " with neither fear nor 
&for. Hence he is loc£ed upon as a ereatore much to be dreaded by all 
who afe anywise conversant with his character and existence. 

The representatives of ins fiunily are seldom met with, which aflbrds the 
mincipal reason why so little, comparatively, is known of his nature and 

If tiie information contained in the above description is correct, (and that 
itis 80, 1 have not the least doubt,) the <*carcague " presents, either die ex* 
traordinary phenomenon of the creation of a new race of wild beasts, or, 
the yving relics of an order now almost extinct ; and, whether he be the one 
or the o£er, his existence is vested with deep interest to all lovers of the 
marvellous. 

. Ab old tr^per related the following story, soon after the incident abow 
iioti<?ed, which will serve to give some idea of this ferocious animal : 

A pajrty of hunters, at their night camp, were seated around a large fire, 
at whose side were fixed several pieces of meat, en appolast for the purpose 
of roasting. All were waiting patiently the kind office of the fire in the 
preparation of their longed-for suppers, when, attracted by the fumes of 
the cooking viands, a '* carcague " came bounding from the mountain-side, 
directly over their heads, and made for the roasts, with which he disappeared 
before even a shot could be fired in their defence. 

Thus bold and daring is their nature, and so littie is their regard for the 
presence of man. 

Bearing southward, in the course of a few miles we came to a laz||e 
ereek, and camped early in the afternoon, near the base of a lofty mountain 
of the Medicine Bow range. 

In this vicinty were the relics of three Indians forts. On the banks of 
the stream was an abundance of timber of various kinds ; the bottoma 
were broad and of a rich soil, shut in by abrupt acclivities that lead to the 
arid plains through which the creek traces its way. 

Game appeared in great abundance in all directions, and seemed more 
than usually tame and accessible. 

Soon after camping, three of us went in quest of a fresh supply of eat- 
ables, and, towards night, returned with the choice portions of a buffiJo 
and a black-tailed dear. 

The valley also af&rded large quantities of wild onions, which were 
shooting forth with singular luxuriance. 

We passed the night in quiet slumber, neither of us dreaming of the 
possible existence of human beings, other than ourselves, within a less 
cUstance than one hundred miles. 

In the morning, however, we were awakened by the wild yell of savages, 
and, on looking to ascertain the cause, saw a dense throng of painted 
monsters surrounding us, who were whooping, screeching, and dancing is 
a meet terrific and fantastic manner. Seizing our guns, we levelled at the 
fytemoet di them, who immediately sheathed their bows and made the sign 
of friendship and their nation. 



\ 



172 A TEMPERANCE NATION. 

Tbev were Crows, and, having discovered ue the afternoon before, ncm 
came for a morning call. 

The chief of the band bore the name of Little Robber, and was a latge^ 

ftly, well-made man, as, in fact, were all his party. He was recognized 
one of as as an old acquaintance, and was greeted as such, when several 
his people came forward to shake hands, and we were soon on most 
friendly terms. 

They informed as, by means of signs, that they were advancing against 
the Sioux, and their village was encamped upon a neighboring creek, a 
little to the right, — after which they insisted upon our accompanying thmn 
to it 

Not waiting for further ceremony, they drove up our horses and com- 
menced saddhng them. Supposing it useless to resist, we yielded compG- 
ance to their wishes, and, in about an hour's ride, came to the village. 
Here we were inducted to the chiefs lodge, where commenced a series oi 
feastings peculiar to Indians on occasions like this. 

The Crows are a -nation living upon the waters of the Yellow-stone, at 
a distance of about four hunc&ed miles west-northwest of Fort Platte. 
Their number embraces not far from four hundred and fifty or five hundred 
lodges, being something near four thousand men, women, and children. 

Ten or twelve years since they were enemies to the whites, but, more 
recently, have been on friendly terms. 

They never kill or injure the white man who comes within their power, 
and rarely take from him anything without returning for it an equivalent 
For instance, — ^they may take his robe, horse, or gun ; . but, in that case, 
they will return another robe, horse, or gun ; acting upon the principle 
that " exchange is no robbery," even though it be compulsory. ^ 

Less contaminated by intercourse with the whites than most mountain 
tribes, they will tolerate the importation of liquor among them upon no con- 
sideration, not even by traders for their own individual use. Whenever it 
is ascertained that any one in their vicinity, whether white man or Indian, 
is in possession of that article, they take it from him, if necessary, by force, 
and pour it upon the ground. ' 

Their bitter hatred of this vile stuff, is said to have resulted in the fol- 
lowing strange manner : 

The whites, as usual, came first among them bringing alcohol; and, at a 
feast given to the chiefs, soon after, several of the latter became intoxicated 
from too lavish potations of the new and curious drink. 

In common with inebriates of civilized society, they acted very foolishly, 

and, on appearing before their people, the drunken chiefs became the suD- 

ject of ridicule. This so shamed them, that, upon the return of sobriety, 

they could not be persuaded to taste another drop, and thereafter nuide use 

of their united influence to prevent its introduction and sale. 

Ever since the above occurrence, alcohol has received, from the Crows, 
the apnellation of ** FooVs Water,*^ a term at once attesting their nioe 
moral discernment and good sense. 

Several years since, a missionary, on visiting them, began thioiirii 
an interpreter to rehearse the story how sin first came into the woa^ 
and how a] men had become bad-— whether white or red. 



• • • • 

v. 

« « <^ • 



• •• 

• 



• 9 m • • < 










Tn Cbow Chut KAEora a 



CROW WAR PARTY. I7ff 

Thus 'premised, he proceeded to explain the great truths of (^hris- 
tianity, and averred that he had come to do them good, and to tell them 
how to be happy; asserting that, unless they listened to him and wor- 
shipped the Grood Spirit in the manner he pointed out, they could never^ 
at death, reach that happy country into if^ch good people alone find 
admittance. 

One of the chiefs upon this arose and made the following reply : 

** My white brother is a stranger to us. He talks bad of us, and he talks 
bad of his own people. 

" He does this bcMcause he is ignorant. He thinks my people, like hisi 
are wicked. Thus far he is wrong! 

** Who were they that killed the veiy good man of whom he tells us ? 
None of them were red men ! 

** The red man will die for good men, who are his friends ; — he will not 
km them! 

" Let my pale-face brother talk to the white man — his own people — ^they 
are very bad. He says, he would do us good ! He does no good to chide 
us and say we are very bad. 

" True we are bad ; and were we bad as the pale-&ces it would become 
us to listen to him ! 

" Would my brother do us good 7 Then, let him tell us how to make 
powder and we will believe in the sincerity of his professions ; — but let him 
not belie us by saying we are bad like the pale-faces !" 

These Indians rarely kill the women and children of an enemy when in 
their power, and, in this particular, they show themselves unlike most of 
the wild tribes found on the American continent. 

They are a brave and noble people, prosecuting their endless hostilities 
against the Sioux and Blackfeet, (the only nations with whom they are at 
variance,) not so much to gratify an innate love for war, as from a just 
hatred of the meanness of those they war against 

In the summer of 1842, a war-party of some two hundred Crows inva- 
ded the Sioux country by way of Laramie pass, and penetrated as far as 
Fort Platte, and beyond, in pursuit of their enemy. 

A few miles above the Fort, having met with a lone French engage, who 
was rather ^reen in all that pertains to Indians as well as some other 
things, they began by signs to enquire of him the whereabouts of the La- 
cotas, (the sign for them being a transverse pass of the right front-finger 
across the throat.) 

The poor Frenchman, mistaking this for the avowed intention ol cutting 
his throat, commenced bellowing a la calf, accompanying the music by an 
industrious appliance of crosses in double-quick time — ^not forgetting to 
make use of sundry most earnest invocations of the blessed Virgin to gra- 
ciously vouchsafe to him deliverance from impending danger. 

The Indians, perceiving his strange conduct to be the result of fear, felt 
disposed to have a little fun at his expense ; fo, mounting him upon a horsei 
they bound his hands and feet and guarded him to a post of the Amen 
can Fur Company as a prisoner. 



170 PLAIN8 OF LARAMIE. 

The Fort gates being closed against them, they demanded admittance 
on the plea oif wishing to trade.' 

''What would you buy ?** asked the commandant 

« Tobacco." 

" What have you brought to pay for it ?" 

" A white man." 

^ A white man ?" exclaimed the fonner ; ** at what price ?" 

" Oh, he is not worth much. A plug of tobacco is his full value !" con* 
tinued the warriors. 

The commandant now bsgan to understand the joke; and, on recognizing 
the prisoner as an employee of the other Fort, he told them they might 
possibly find a market for him at the next post, but for Ms own part he was 
not disposed to purchase. 

The Indians then paraded around the Fort, and, after saluting its in- 
mates with three deafening whoops, proceeded at full charge towards Fort 
Platte. 

When arrived, having prostrated two scaffolds of dead Sioux by the 
way, they informed the person in charge, that they had brought back one 
of his men, and claimed from him a plug of tobacco for &eir trouble. 
The circumstances attending this request were of so comical a nature, the 
commandant felt disposed to humor the joke, and gave the tobacco, upon 
which they immediately left in pursuit of their enemies. 

Having remained prisoners to the hospitality of these Indians for two 
days and a half, we were at length permitted again to resume our journey. 

Following the creek downwards tor the two days next succeeding, and 
then bearing to the left, after a ride of some twelve miles, we struck Lara- 
mie river at a point which presented broad bottoms upon each side vi ith an 
abundance of timber ; here we remained encamped till the subsequent day. 

In journeying thus fiir, we passed over a sufficient extent of this broad 
expanse to give a general description of it, from personal observation coup- 
led with information derived from others more experienced. 

The Plains of Laramie are bounded north and east by the Black Hills, 
south by a ridge of naked elevations, (composed of soft, arenaceous rock 
and terrene limestone, embedded in marl and white clay, sterile and almost 
entirely destitute of vegetation,) and west by the Medicine Bow Moun- 
tains. 

This section includes an area one hundred and sixty miles long by 
seventy broad. 

The northern portion of it is a high plateau, almost destitute of springs 
or streams of water, having a mixed soil of clay and sand, producing the 
^ss and other peculiarities incident to the grand prairies. Westerly, it 
16 composed of red sand and gravel, tolerably fertile and abundant in rocky 
fragments. The southern portion is watered by a number of streams that 
rise in the Medicine Bow Mountains and flow eastward ; some of them 
pouring their waters into Laramie river, and others losing themselves in 
the sand. 

Towards the southwestern extremity, at the base of a lofty, isolated 
mountain, is a salt lake of considerable dimensions. Several other lakes 



INCIDENTAL REMARKS. 177 

aie also fonnd adjacent to the Medicine Bow Mountains, whose waters 
are strongly impregnated with mineral salts. 

In numerous pliu^es the surfiice, for small distances, is entirely naked 
and whitened with saline efflorescences, that vie in their appearance with 
the unspotted purity of fresh-fallen snow. 

The Luamie river * traces its way through the whole extent^ — ^rising in 
the southern eztremitv of the Medicine Bow Mountains and in the desdate 
highlands that form the dividing ridge between its own and the waters of 
Cliche a la Poudre, and, after flowing a distance of some three hundred 
miles, discharges itself into the Platte. 

Upon this river and its branches are many beautiful bottoms of rich al- 
luvial soil, well adapted to cultivation, varying from five to ten miles in 
length, and from two to five in breadth. These bottoms are to some ex- 
tent well supplied with timber, consisting of ash, elm, Cottonwood, box- 
elder, and willow, while the adjacent mountains araChills afibrd pine, cedar, 
and balsam. 

Of the various kinds of wild fruits and berries are found cherries, plums, 
currants, gooseberries, service-berries, bufi&lo-berriee, and some few 
grapes ; among its vegetables and roots are the bread-root, pomme blanc, 
onions, and commote. 

Its prevailing rock is sandstone, (gray micaceous, brown argillaceous, 
red granitic, and ferruginous,) Umestone, (siliceous, testaceous, fossilifer- 
ous, and terrene,) and red granite, with various conglomerates and heavy 
boulders of fragmentary and transition rock. 

Among the mineral productions incident to this regiqn are salt, sulphur, 
soda, magnesia, nitre, alum, coal, iron, copper, and gold, (the latter only in 
small quantities.) Among its game is embraced nearly every variety 
found in countries adjacent to the mountains. 

The high prairies skirting the tributaries of the Laramie, though favored 
with many valleys of fertile soil, are fit only for grazing purposes, on ac- 
count of their general aridity and scarcity of water ; a fault, by the way, 
too common with a large proportion of that vast extent of territory from 
the neighborhood of our western frontiers almost to the very shores of the 
Pacific. 

*Thi0 river received its present name from one Joseph T4inunift,a FVenchoap 
per, who was kiUed near its mouth, several yean since, by the Indians. 



178 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Sibflle'i-hole.— Novel bitten.-^hiigwater.— Gold.^:;urio8it7. — ^Affidn at the Forti 
— AmutementB. — Gambliog among ■qoaws, and games |jayed.— Squaw dnfles, 
and riding fashion. — Items of interest to the canons, proving the intercoune of 
the ancient Romans with Uie people of this continenL 

On res^aming our course, we soon after struck into a lodge-trail leading 
to the Platte by way of Sibille's creek ; — following this we travelled over 
an undulating and sandy prairie for about ten miles, and came to a chain 
of rugged mountains, beieirmg from north to south, through which we pas- 
sed, by a tedious and circuitous route, for a considerable distance, winoing 
among rocks and narrow defiles of naked hills, till we were finally ushered 
into a beautiful opening facing the east, known as Sibille's-hole. 

This valley is situated at t& confluence of two small streams, heading 
in the adjoining mountains, that unite to form Sibille's creek. 

It is shut in upon three sides by lofty ridges, many hundred feet fai|^ 
consisting of immense piles of earthy limestone and marl, whose rough, 
naked sides, ornamented with occasicffial dwarf-pines, cedars, or firuit-bcSfi- 
ing shrubs, present a wild and romantic scenery. 

The valley is four or five miles in length and of variable width, with a 
strong, black soil, afibrding a goodly supply of timber. 

Tm season was further advanced in this than in any other place we had 
yet visited. Several specimens of wikl flowers were in full bloom, belading 
the soft air with their sweetest odors. The grass too had attained a height 
of some three inches, and furnished a most sumptuous entertainment for our 
jaded animals, which they were nowise backvrard to accept 

Wishing to afford them an opportunity to ncniit their strength, we re- 
mained encamped the two following days. 

During the mterval we were successful in killing two very fat bulls, and 
were thus enabled to renew the series of feasting which had graced the 
greater part of our journey. 

I here became for the first time acquainted with a kind of beverage very 
common among mountaineers. The article alluded to may with much pro- 
priety be termed '* bitters," as the reader will readily acknowledge on learn- 
ing the nature of its principal ingredient 

it is prepared b}r the following simple process, viz : with one pint of water 
mix one-fourth gill of bufi&lo-gall, and you will then have oefore you a 
wholesome and exhilarating driiuL 

To a stomach unaccustomed to its use it may at first create a sligfatly 
noisome sensation, like the inceptive eflects of an emetic ; and, to one 



CHIJGWATER. 179 

(rtioiigljr hili'oii8,it might cause vomitiiiff ; — ^bnt, on the eeoood or thud triml, 
the stomach attains a taste for it, and receives it with no inconsidendile 
relish. 

Upon the whole system its eflects are benefidal. As a stimnlent, it 
braces the nerves without producing a corresponding relaxation on the ces- 
sation of its influence ; it also tends to restore an impaied appetite and in* 
vigorate the digestive powers. 

As a sanative, it tends to make sound an imtated and ulcerated stomach, 
reclaiming it to a healthful and lively tone, and thus striking an efl^tive 
blow at tiiat most prolific source of so large a JDAJonty of the discMses 
common to civilzed hfe. 

From what I have seen of its resuHs, I consider it one of the most inno' 
cent and useful medicines in cases of dyspepsy, and will hazard the further 
opiniim, that, were those laboring un4er tne wasting influences of this dis- 
ease to drink gaUrbiUers and coimne uemselves exclusively to the use of 
some 0716 kind of diet, (animal food always preferable,) thousands who are 
now pining away by piecemeal, would be restored to ferfect soundness, and 
inataiedfrom the very threshold of a certain grave which yawns to receive 
tiiem! 

Resuming our course, we continued down Sibillis creek to its junction 
with the Laramie ; then, following the course of that river, in the aitemoon 
of the third day we arrived at Fort Platte, after an absence of nearly two 
months, — Shaving travelled, in the interval, a distance of more thaji five 
hundred miles. 

To give a general description of the country passed over durinff the 
concluding part of our journey, would seem too much like a recapitufiiticm 
of nrevious remarks. 

Our obeervations in reference to the river and creek bottoms, may be 
again correctly applied ; as may, also, those relative to the timber, ancf the 
geological character of the adjoining prairies. 

Several miles above the Fort we crossed the Chugwater, a large afiluent 
of the Laramie, from the right. This creek takes its rise in a wild and 
desolate section of the Black Hills, near the head of Horse creek. 

Thirty miles or more of its way is traced through a dreaiy wilder* 
\jesa of rock, sand, and clay, almost entirely devoid of vegetation. 

This region, it is said, afSirds gdd ; and, indeed, I have received fre- 
quent assurances that that valuable metal hsB been procured, in small par* 
ticles, firom among the sand of the creek-bed. 

This region also claims many natural curiosities, of which I may take 
occasion to speak more particularly hereafter ;— one, however, situated 
upon Chugwater, here seems more appropriately to demand a passing 
notice. 

It consists of a columnar elevation of sandstone and marl, towering 
aloft to the height of- several hundred feet, like the lone chimney of some 
razed mansion, — standing as the melancholy monument of the ruins that 
•TODond it . 

This singular pile of rock and earth is nearly of a quadrangular form, 
quite regular in its structure, and comnares verv nearly with the " Chim* 



1^ FEUALE GAMBLERS. 

ney ** below Scot's Bluff) in its general ondines. It stands within a short 
distance of the east bank of Uie Chug?irs,tor, tod gives the ciedc its present 
name.* 

Our arrival at the Fort dated the 36th of April. The boat being com- 
pleted, ail things, save the spring rise, were in readiness for the intended 
voyage. 

This craft was put together in regular ship-shape, and finished in a 
workman-like manner, ^e measured fifty feet keel by thirteen beam, and« 
without her lading, drew but an inch and a half of water. Her intended 
burthen was between two and three tons. While admiring l|er beauty 
and symetry, little did I think of the sufferings in store for me with her 
hardy crew. 

Several important changes had taken place during onr absence. Tbo 
Fort with its fixtures now claimed difierent owners, and was occupied by 
the men of two companies besides our own. This swelled the present 
number to some forty or fifty, and afR)rded quite a lively scene. 

Now was an interval of leisure to all hands, and the time, unemployed 
in eatine and sleeping, was passed in story-telling, ball-playing, foot-racing, 
target-sTiooting, or oUier like amusements. 

Several, forming themselves into a club for forensic debate, secured a 
prolific source of entertainment, for the time being. A partner in one of 
the trading firms, whose men were now stationed at the Fort, made him- 
self quite conspicuous as a participator in these discussions. 

He was very self-important and conceited, and not a little ignorant 
withal, and with regard to temperance, being imiformly about '* three 
sheets in the wind," and the other ^t^ering', his spoutings were an ez- 
haustless fund of laughter. 

At his request, in order to render the exercises more spirited^ the merits 
of the arguments presented were decided upon by a committee of threei 
and the sp&akers aecided against, sentenced to liqtiorize the club. 

The treating, however, was always on one side ; for, as the whole busi- 
ness was an a^Tair of sport, the committee of arbitration generallv had this 
primary object in view while pronouncing their decisions. When these 
were averse to our orator, he of course paid the forfeit as an affiiir of debt; 
and when favorable to him, he was equally prompt in proferring a common 
treat, exultatory upon his fancied success^ 

My own part in this performance was that of a mere looker-on, bot k 
required of one more than my usual self-mastery, to retain his jrravit^ uider 
the potent infiuences of so ludicrous an exhibition. 

Other matters of interest, however, occurred at this time, and, as they 
tend to throw some light upon Indian habits and customs, perhaps tfale 
reader will not look upon it as altogether out of plaoe for me to notiet 
them. 

<'Thewoiia''Cbug''iinp]ioB chimney; of tha dwivtion of tfas Isnn, hi w i l iic » f 

am ignorant. 



SQUAW FASHIONS. 181 

At Uie two Forte in this neighborhood were some ten or twelve sqnaws, 
marncd to the traders and engages of the different fur companies. These 
ladies vere in the habit of meeting, occasionally, for gambling purposes. 
In this iiey acted as systematically as the most experienced UacK legs of 
a Missi^ippi steamboot ; if they bailed to play as high, it was only for the 
lack of Cleans. 

Ball-pliying was one of the games upon which heavy bets were made. 
The instrument used in this amusement consisted of two globular forms, 
about two 'nches each in diameter, which were attached by a short string. 
The play-giound was the open prairie in iront of the Fort, and embraced an 
area of neaily a mile in extent. 

As the initiatory step^ each party, composed of equal numbers, selected 
an equal amoint of valuables, consisting of beads, scarlet, vermilion, rings, 
awls, shells, &c., which were placed in two piles about half a mile apart, 
and equi-distan; between them was placed the balL Each gamestress, armed 
with her club, tken repaired to the spot, and the opposing parties arrayed 
themselves, the oie facing the other with the ball between uiem. At a given 
signal they all stiike — ^the one party striving to propel it towards its own 
valuables, and the other to force it in a contrary direction. The party pro- 
pelling it to its owi pile, wins, and becomes entitled to both. 

As success in thi& game depends more upon fleetness of foot than skill 
in striking, a large puty of squaws, thus engaged, opens to the beholder a 
rich scene of amusement 

Another game is stil more extensively practised among them. This is 
somewhat upon the principle of dice, though difierent in its details. 

Six plum-stones, smoothly polished, and marked with various parallel, 
triangular, and transverse lines, are thrown loosely into a small, plate-like 
basket, around which the players are seated with their stores of trin- 
kets. The leader then receives the basket in one hand, and, briskly mov- 
ing it to change the positbn of the dice, suddenly strikes it upon the 
ground, tossing the plum-stones from their places and catching them in their 
descent. 

The amount won depends upon the number of triangular and transverse 
lines left uppermost. 

The loser, having paid the forfeit, next takes the basket and describes 
the same movements, receives her winnings in like manner, and returns it to 
her opponent, — and so on alternately. 

Much cheating and trickeiy are practised in this game. 

The game of hand, for a description of which the reader is referred to a 
previous mpginal notei is also a favorite play with squaws as well as men. 
Large parties of both sexes not unfrequently engage in this amusement, 
and many a poor Indian loses his all by the c^ration. 

Speaking of squaws reminds me of not having previously described 
their dress and i^pearance. 

The dress of a squaw is scarcely less simple than that of an Indiaa» 
Two pieces of skin, sewed together in a bag-nke form, (of sufficient mm 
to envelope the body from neck to knee, leaving an aperture for the fonner 

16 



182 INTERESTDfO IX) ANTiaUABIANS. 

with the anna,) constitate her gown, which is completed by two other 
(ueces of skin sewed from neck to waist so as to &1] loosely upon the arms 
as far as the elbow ; then, with leg^gins of thin deer ot antelope skiD, 
^irnished moccasins, and a painted robe, you have before you the full rig 
of a mountain squaw. 

Some of the younger ones, however, flaunt dresses quite tastefully oma^ 
mentsd, with ftill capes and frinffe-works, garnished with beads %ad porco- 
pine-quilis, that present a wild, fantastic appearance, not altqgetlier es- 
traiiifod to beauty. 

A sqaaw prides herself much upon the number of rings in ker ears and 
upon tier filers, as well as the taste displayed in plaiting her hair and 
beauti lying &r fkce. 

Women, in savage alike with civilized life, are vested wich a good sup- 
ply of pride and vanily in their composition,— -all, fond of s&ow and gaudy 
equipage. But the mountain squaw, next to ornaments, displays tlie most 
vanity in the gav caparison of her riding^ horse, and the splendid trappings 
of his saddle. Both of them are fancifully garnished with beads and paint, 
and bestrung with various trinkets, that impart a tinkling sound, as they 
strike each other at every movement, and fill the rider's ears with that wild 
and simple music so consonant to her feelings and thoughts. 

Men and women practise the same mcrae of ridiag, (astride,) and a 
squaw is as much at nome on horseback as the most experienced cavalier. 

This fashion is properly considered unbecoming for ladies of civilized 
countries ; yet, improper as it may seem, it is quite common with the ladies 
of New Mexico. 

As my subsequent travels in the countries bordering upon the Rocky 
Mountains preclude the opportunity of speaking connectedly of the Sioux 
nation, I cannot fore^ the present occasion for presenting to the curious, 
some few items relative to the language of these Indians, that tend to shed 
BO small amount of light upon the ancient history of the American conti- 
nent 

There are several remarkable peculiarities in the Sioux language, that 
cannot fail to prove interesting and satisfoctory, so far as they go, to all 
lovers of antiquarian research. 

The first of these consists in the striking similarity observable m its 
seneral structure to that of the ancient Romans, when the two are care- 
fully compared with each other/ 

In regard to the arrangement of words and the construction of sen* 
tences, they are both ^vemed by the same fixed laws of euphony, irre- 
spective of the relative position otherwise maintained by the di^rent 
parts of spoech. It will be observed that the leading purpose of the speak- 
er of either language is, to avoid a harsh and inharmonious intermingling 
of words, such as would grate upon the ear when pronounced in an ab^ 
f upt connection ; and, by so doing, to give a smooth and musical turn to 
the expression of his ideas. 

The few brief sentences, hereto subjoined in the same order as they oc- 
cur in the original, accompanied by the translation of each word as it ap- 
fears, will serve to illustrate this matter more fully : 



^A> 



COMPARISON OF LANGUAGES. 



188 



^^^^^^^^^tii^m^^^^^^m^^^^^^^i^^^0^^i0t0*0^0^^B <»^^»^MW^#»»»*»^^^^ ^%^#w^^M^^MM»^^^M<»% n0^0^m0*0*0^0*0t0^0*0^0t0t0i0^^tm0^m0^m0t0^gK0t^^^f^0t0^ 



LATIN. 

Inyictom animi robur ostensit. 
Inymeible of mind itrength he displayed. 

Omnia delicarum instrumenta e 
All of delicacies the intnunenbi firom 

castris ejecit 
camp he cast 

Non amo nfmium diligentes. 
Not I lore overmuch the careAiL 



SIOUX. 

Tepe nea-toor tooctaf 
Loage your own where is it? 

Mea warchee mazarka nea-tonr. 
I want gon joorown. 

Kokepa warneche wecluurcha ha. 
Afraid nothing the man is. 

Minewarka appello warktashne ha 
Medicine- water I say not good is. 



A mere glance at the foregoing will at once show the constmctional 
similarity tetween the two ; and, to illustrate the proposition stili fiurther, I 
here subjoin yet other proofs of a more important relationship : 



- LATnr. 

Appello, (pres. ind., 1st per. sing.; inf. 
appelldjre,) I declare, I proclaim. 

Bestia, a wild beast 

Caeca, tmcertain, ambiguous^ confu- 
sed, rash, 

Cogor, one who collects, brings togeth- 
er, compels^ forces, or heaps up. 

Mea, (meus, a, urn,) (/ or oelonging 
tome. 

Mena, a narrow sharp fish. 

Ne, (Uiis when affixed to a word or a 
sentence gives it a negative signi- 
fication,) no, noL 

Pap®, rare, excellent, wonderftd. 

Pater, father. 

Pes, the foot. 

Taurus, a bull. 

Tepor, warmth. 

Taor, (tui, tutus sum,) to look, to see. 



SIOXTX. 

Appello, I declare, I proclaim, I teOf 

Imakeknoton. 
Beta, a buffalo. 

Ceicha, bad, disorderly, unsound. 
Cosor, a maker of anything, a manvr 

facturer, one who produces a thtng 

by an ingenious arrangement ^ 

materials. 
Mea, J, myself, me. 
Mena, a knife. 
Ne, (this word is used precisely the 

same as in Latin, and has a similar 

meaning,) not. 
Papa, meat, flesh used for food. 
Fater, fire. 
Pea, the foot. 
Tau, (or tah,) a buU. 
Tepe, a lodge. 
Tula, (astonishment,) look! see (here i 



I might pursue this comparison to a yet greater extent, were my know- 
ledge of Sionx sufficiently full and critical for the task, (for I have a firm 
coi&dence that many other similarities might be pointed out, quite as glar- 
ing in their character as any of the above ;) but, enough, I trust, has aJ- 
rrady been said to fortify the position so largely warranted bv the pre- 
mises, to wit : that in former ages the Romans maintained a foothdd upon 
the American continent, and hadtn/ercottrse with this nation, either by anna 
or by commerce. 

The argument drawn from the foregoing is still further strengthened, 
when we take into consideration the fact, that language is constancy vair* 
ing in its form, and changing the meaning and pronunciation of its wonUi 
as time progresses. To exemplify this more clearly and foreibly, let the 
reader compare the works of sbmdard English authora of the present d»r 
with those of the like not more tiian five hundred years since, and he wiM 
readily acknowledge the palpable indications of progressive change. 



iii raS ROMANS IN ABIERICA. 

If 80 riiort an iatervsl has produced a transformation so bold in a written 
lanfioage, what might we look for in one spoken only ? 

5ut, an interval of three times fire hnndred years has passed since the 
Romans and the Sioux held interconrse with each other, and we yet find 
the general structure of the two languages strikingly simifair, and several 
of their words identical in meaning and pronunciation ! And, though the 
latter observation &il8 in some cases, even this, so &r from proving any- 
thing averse to the position before assumed, serves to strengthen it 

Tne word pater^ for instance, pronounced alike in both languages, dif- 
fers in signification ; being used in the one to imply father, in the other 
fire. This amnrent discrepancy of meaning may be explained in a few 
words. The Sioux are accustomed to venerate the sun as one of the more 
especial manifestations of the Divine Essence, who is regarded as the 
FATHER or creator of all things ; and it, being the great source of light 
and heat, is naturally looked upon as an immense body of fire. Thus, in 
the course of ages, the term became perverted in its meaning and applica- 
tion, and, instead of being used to express the sun, or Great Spirit, the 
fiither of all, it now only implies the simple element of fire, an emanation 
from the sun. 

So in relation to the Latin word tepor, warmth, and the Sioux word tepe, 
a lodge. The lod^ is employed in winter to retain the heat within itself, 
and exclude the cold air; nor is it wonderful that, in the ^urogress of yeais^ 
the term tepor, or tepe, should become the only one by which a lodge is 
known. 

The word mena, is also pronounced the same in both, though diiiferent in 
its signification ; meaning, in Latin, a narrow sharp fish, and, in Sioux, a 
knife. In explanation of this, I would barely refer to the similarity of 
shape between a knife and a narrow sharp fish. 

The relationship disclosed between these two languages is seemingly 
too close and sigmficant to be attributed to mere chance or accident, imd 
can be in no other way satisfactorily accounted for, than by admitting the 
correctness of the premises before quoted. 

But this position, curious as it may seem to some readers, and impr8g> 
nable as it must doubtless prove, has other weapons to protect it at com- 
mand ; a!hd, ere dismissing the subject, I will briefly notice some of them. 

It is by no means a conjecture of recent origin, that the ancient Romans 
did actually colonize portions of the American continent. The industri- 
ous researches of antiquarians have long since brought to light noany items 
ti^ich prove and strengthen it, though none of them so tangible and obri- 
oufl as those previously noticed. 

Several obscure hints of the existence of extensive Roman colonies 
planted westward of the Pillars of Hercules, (doubtless alluding to the 
AfT.ericaii continent,) have been detected in the writings of ancient authors 
yet extant ; but still further proof is afiforded in the relics of temjdes, cities^ 
voais, and fortified camps, long since discovered in Peru, Mexico, and the 
United Skates, which strongly savor of Roman origin. 

l%e ancieal worka at Marietta, Ohio, have been reguded, by not a few, 
iv the oflbpring of Roman industry and military science, — and various other 
temaina^inat aignalize the Mississippi valley, point quite plainly to this 
■■tion for a parentage. But a proof, still more conclusive than any yet ad- 



WE EHBAUL IM 

dttced, is aflbrded br the discovery of t genoiiie Ramta MB, in the Stat* 
of Miasouri, Bsvenl years since. 

Taking aU Uiese corroborative circnmstances in eonnectioD» the fact that 
Roman cok>nies did exist, to some extent, upon this continent in past afssi 
must be xenuded as placed beyond successful controvwsy. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

Singular exhibition of natural affection.— Embark for the States.— Scardtf of pto- 
viaions and consequent hardship and sufiering. — Extraoidinary daring of wolves.— 
Difiicoicies of navigation. — ^Novel diet— Fishing.— A fish stoiy, and another to 
natch it— A bull story.— Hard aground and dismal situation.— Extreme exposurs.— 
Cold, hungry, and wet— Again afloat— Re-supply of provisions. — Camp on fire.-~ 
A picture of Platte navigation.— Country north of river.— Adventure with a bull.— 
Indian benevolence. — Summary of hardships and fleprivations.— Abandon voyage. 

Soon after our retum, one of th» hunters came in from a short excnrsion 
followed by a bafikk> calf, which appeared as tame and docile as if always 
accustomed to the presence of man. 

This incident first brought to my kuowledge a remarkable peculiarity in 
the nature of these animals, — ^viz : the strength of aflection existing between 
the mother and her ofl&pring. 

The bu^yo will never desert her calf, except in cases of imminent 
danger, and then, never for a long time ; — she is certain to retnm promptly 
in search of it, even at the hazara of her own life. The calf, on the other 
hand, exhibits an equal, or rather ^superior, love for its mother. 

If she, to whom he owes his birth, falls a prey to the relentless hunter, he 
desertb her not, but lingers uear her lifeless carcase, till the butcher-knife 
performs its office, and the reeking flesh belades the pack-horse; — ^nor then, 
even, does he leave her. 

As the honored relics are borne away, he not unfreqnently follows on, 
moumfolly, regardless of aught else, as if saying, ** Where thou eoest let 
me go, and now thou art dead, I would live no longer." There is some* 
thing touchingly beautiful in such exhibitions of natural aflection on the 
part of dumb brutes. 

jifay lih. Availing ourselves of a slight rise of water, we embarked oo 
onr meditated voyage to the States. 

The boat was freighted with some sixty packs* of robes, and provisions 
for four weeks. A barge belonging to another company, also in readinesi^ 
started with us, and we all flattered ourselves with the hope of a speedy 
and pleasant trip. 

The two boats nnmbered a united crew of eleven mexi^ — ^nune ecmsist- 
ing of five, and that of our consort counted six. 

* A pack of robes general! v embraces ten skins, and weighs about eighty poondib j 

16* 



186 NOT TO BE ENVIED. 

Slipping cable, we glided midway of the Btream, and gave a parting 
■alute to the fnends who lined the shore, accompanied by a load hurra 
and waving of hats, deeply responded to by them, — and even tears coursed 
their way a down the ausky visages of our voyageors, when mindful of 
the fate separating them — ^perhaps forever ! 

The crews now struck up a merry song, while the drippuiff oars, as they 
spumed the crystal waters, responded their time in measured strokes. 

As we passed swiftly along and were fast receding from within hailing 
distance of the Fort, an old mountaineer, who stood gazing upon us, ex- 
claimed, " Ah, boys ; you can sing now, but your tune will be altered ere- 
lonff !" 

This strange announcement, though a riddle at the time of its utterance, 
soon began to more than verify itseu, and often did we repeat the reniark, 
** Well, sure enough, our tune has changed." 

Moving along prettily during the day — sometimes floating with the cur- 
rent then again plying oars, — we reached the mouth of Horse creek ; and, 
passing on a short distance, lay to for the lught. 

The day following we again pushed on; but, after proceeding ten or 
twelve miles, the water became so shallow, we were compelled to hy by to 
await a further rise, and struck camp in a small grove of cottonwood upon 
the right bank of the Platte, a echort distance above Scott's Bluff. Here we 
remained for some two weeks. 

The crew of our consort being poorly supplied with provisions, we 
divided our own with them, and, at the expiration of a few days, were left 
entirely destitute. 

From this on, we were dependent solely upon such game as chance 
threw in our way, — sometimes starving for two or three days, and then 
feasting for a like interval, upon the prc^ucts of successful hunting. 

To us was a tedious lot, — ^there being no game in the country, save per- 
chance a few straggling bulls, and they rarely within less distance than ten 
or twelve miles. Our hunting excursions often led further than that, and 
when we were so fortunate as to kill, the proceeds were borne upon our 
Dacks to camp. We became so accustomed to packing in this manner, it 
was thought no extra burthen for an individual to carry upwards of a hundred 
pounds of fresh meat at a single load, some ten or twelve successive miles, 
over an open, sandy prairie, and beneath the scorching rays of an almost 
vertical suii. 

So far from regarding it a task, we esteemed it a pleasure, and were 
glad to appease &e cravings of appetite even at so small a sacrifice of 
comfort and con^pnience. 

The reason for the scarcity of all kinds of game in the vicinity of the 
river at this time, was tlie recent burning of the prairie upon both sides, 
for many miles back, leaving not even me vestige of vegetation for the 
subsistence of any graminivorous animals. 

This we found to be the case nearly the entire distance to the forks. 

During the latter part of our stay at this camp, it rained almost inces- 
santly ; we also encountered a severe snow storm. 

The winds were usually high, and frequently blew with hurricane-vk>- 
leoce. 



FISH STORIEg. 187 

A pack of hnngiy wolves^ attracted by the scent of camp, were our 
regular nocturnal visitors, and proved a constant source of annoyance. On 
one occasion tbey carried oif a bake-kettle to a distance of several hundred 
yards ; — at another tune, they took away a tin-pan, which we never after- 
wards recovered ; — and, stranger yet, one night these piratical pests stole a 
fur cap from off my head while I was sleeping, and in the morning, alter t 
diligent search, no trace of it could be found. 

The river havmg slightly risen, we again loosed cable, and, after toiling 
all day, and tugging with might and main, by hand-spikes and levers, — 
twisting, screwing, and Ufting, now in water up to our necks, and now on 
dry sand-bars, we succeeded in dragging, or ratner carrying, our craft lor a 
distance of about five miles, and again lay oy for four succeeding days to 
await a still further rise. 

Upon the opposite side of the river was a bald-eagle's nest, with two half^ 
grown fledgelings. One of our ftaitj, ascending the tree, captured the 
young ones, ana we had a fine meal from their carcases. A wood-duck's 
nest, containing some twelve eggs, near by, afibrded a seasonable repast,^- 
and, in hunting for game, we came upon the nest of a wild goose, as well 
as those of numerous ravens among the neighboring cottonwoods and wil* 
lows, which we subjected to such forced contributions as appetite demanded. 

A portion of the interval was employed in fishing, but with poor success, 
the fish of the Platte being nearly all of them small, and not very plentiful 
even, at that 

An old Franco-C/anadian, of our crew, here favored us with, perhaps, a 
little the biggest fish story of any told at the present day. 

He had been down the Missouri on several occasions in boats connected 
with the fur trade. On one of these voyages, while in the act of reaching 
over the boat-side for a drink of water, he dropped his cup, which imme- 
diately sank to the bottom of the river and was lost. 

Three years afterwards he again passed the same place, with hooks and 
lines attached to the boat-stem for the purpose of catching fish as he glided 
altfflg. 

A large cat-fish, attracted by the tempting bait borne upon the hook, 
greedily swallowed it, and, in a trice, found himself translated to a new 
and strange element. 

The creature was so heavy, it took two men to pull him into the Ixmt, whi e 
his gigantic proportions astonished all beholders. 

But the most surprising thing was revealed on opening him ; — there, 
snugly stowed away in one corner of the monster's capacious maw, re|)o- 
sed tlie identical cup our voyageur had lost, three years before, with his 
name and the date marked upon it ! 

'* Pooh ! Gumbo," said an old sailor, ^ I can beat such stories as that, all 
day. 

" Why, fellow, on my last trip from Liverpool to New York, a shark 
f<^owed the ship for a long time, picking up such bits of bread and meat 
as were thrown into the sea. 

** Our steward was a very careless fellow, and, in nhaking the table- 
cloth, he would frequently drop overboard the knives and forks and spoons, 
A9d received from the captain several floggings on that account He was 



188 BULLETS IN A BULL. 

even accused of stealing them, but strongly protested his innocence of the 
latter charge. 

^ Among our passengers was an old whaleman, who, being very expert 
m the use of the harpMui, took it into his head mie day to victimize the 
shark. After several ineffectual attempts, he finally succeeded in forcing 
his instrument through the monster's vitaJs, and drew the lifeless carcase 
alonjratde. 

''The piratical cruiser was so thundering big, it took eight men with 
tackles to raise it on board ; — ^it must have weighed at least sixteen hun- 
dred pounds ! The body of the greedy creature was then laid upon deck, 
and on opening it all were astoniiriied ! What do you think was found, 
Gumbo 7'^ 

** Sacre sharp ! Certes me tink dey fine de spoon, de fork an de knife"* 
Him shark no tollow de ship for nottin." 

'* Well, boys, what do yon all suppose was found 7" 

** Indeed, we could'nt say." 

•* Guess," 

** The Imives and spoons, of course.* 

** You are wrong, to a man." 

** What, in the name of reason, could it have been 7 Do tell — ^we givt 
it up." 

''Hang me, if you aint a bright set of fellows! — Can't guess a thing 
■o easy 7 Why, if I must tell you — ^'twas guts,-— only guts — ^nothing in 
the world but guts /" 

^ Look here. Jack," said one of the listeners, advancing towards him hat 
in hand, *' you can take this. We'll be quite Ukely to remember hereafter 
that fish generally carry their guts inside !" 

The old Frenchman looked rather crest-fiillen at the curious manner in 
which his extraordinary fish story had been matched^ — but felt little dis- 
posed to yield his laurels without an eflS>rt to retrieve them, — so, calling to 
aid his recollections of the marvellous, he again coounenced. 

Several years ago, while in the employ of the American Fur Companyi 
our hero and another man were sent expresses to a distant post It was 
winter; and they travelled on foot, depending for daily subsistence upon 
such game as chance brought in their way. Their course lay through an 
open and cheerless prairie, covered with snow, and the journey occupied 
nearly a month. 

Having been en route some five or six days, their ammunition began to 
fail in the item of lead,— .and only two bullets were left. Their comlitioD 
now became extremely desperate, as there was no way of procuring a 
re-supply, — and anticipated starvation stared them in the nice. 

Determined to eat as lonff as the means of subsistence remained, their 
last balls were shot away in Killing a buffido buU. After furnishing them- 
selves from his carcase with a large supply of meat for present and future 
use, our hero proceeded to cut a few locks of hair from off the creature's 
head, for the purpose of stuffing his moccasins. 

"Bor Dieu ! Vat you tink me fine 7 You no can tell all day ! Me 
no ask you guess. Bon Dieu ! c'etre admirable. Me fine forty baUas, in 



HOW WE SUFFERED. IW 

he head. Me get 'em oat Sacie toimerre ! den me had him sufficient la 
pondre and la ballas for de route ! No go hungry nne leetil bit !'* 

On the fifth day subsequent, we again launched forth into the stream, 
and after a series of most extraordinary exertions, (being obli^ to lighten 
our bcmt several times, by carrying its loading on shore, and reloading an 
often, thus to enable us to lift it over sand-bars,) we succeeded in getting it 
Bome three miles, and finally became safely moored in the middle of tlie 
river, from which it was impossible to extricate ourselves either by going 
backwards, forwards, or sidewise— with or without a cargo. 

Here we remained for three days, and experienced, during the interval^ 
A continuous fall of rain and sleet, which rendered the weatber dismal and 
our own situation disagreeable in the extreme. 

A c&che of liquor having been made, fifteen or twenty miles distant, by a 
trader connected with our consort, a month or two previous, unforbid* 
ding as was the weather, the crew could not rest content until the hiddei) 
treasure was among them. 

Improving the opportunity presented by a slight suspension of the storm, 
one morning two of them started to procure it. Soon after it commenced 
ffioowing and raining, accompanied by a fierce, catting wuid and all the 
withering bleakness of a winter's blast. 

Still l^eiHDg on, however, they obtained the c^he, and returned with it 
towards the b^t. 

But night shut in upon them by the way, and a thrice dreary night it 
was. Being too drunk to navigate, they lost their course and were forced 
to camp in me open prairie, without wood or aught else of which to build a 
fire, or even a robe to cover or a rock to shelter them from the chill wind 
and peltings of the pitiless storm. 

Half-frozen with cold and wet to the skin, the^ lay upon the muddy 
ground and passed the interval, not in sleep, but m a state of drunken 
stupor, produced by inordinate draughts upon the contents of their keg. 

On the next morning they reached the boat, — a beautiful looking couple, 
as might well be supposed ! Covered with mud from head to foot, their 
clothes were wringing wet, and their faces bloated and swollen almost to 
twice their natural size. So complete was the transformation, they were 
scarcely recognizable as the same persons. 

But, regardless of hardship and su^ring, they stuck to the liquor-keg 
and brought it with them as proof of their triumph. 

And now commenced a scene of drunken revelry, which, despite my 
effi>rts to prevent it, soon communicated itself to both crews, and continoed 
without intermission till the stock on hand was exhausted. 

The lack of a fire by which to warm ourselves, contributed materially 
t/a the misery of our present condition ; there being no wood procuraUe 
for that purpose within five or six miles of either shore, and having none 
on board, we were compelled to endure the dreary interval as best we 
conld. 

But another evil came passing upon our already heavy load throojrii 
the entire exhaustion of provisions, and the last of our stay was male 
twice forlorn by cold and mating. 



190 PICTURE OF THE PLATTE. 

The gloomy reality of this sitnation may he thus briefly summed up $— 
we were fast aground in the middle of a river, three-fourths of a mile 
from either shore, confined to the narrow limits of a few feet, emeed to 
the merciless peltinga of a chUl storm of rain and sleet, with onAr a thin 
lodge skin to shelter us, without fire to warm or dry ourselves by, ami, 
worse than all, destitute of the means of appeasing the gnawings of hiiB* 
ger. 

But, forbidding as the picture may seem, it proved only the commence* 
ment of a long series of sufiferinfir and deprivation, more intensely dread- 
ful m its nature, that was yet held in reserve for us. 

On the forenoon of the fourth day the storm abated, and, favored with • 
alight rise of water, by dint of extraordinary efiort we finally succeeded in 
getting afloat, and gained the right shore after pulling our craft over sand- 
bars for a distance of two miles. 

All hands now turned out in search of game, one of whom returned, 
towards night with an antelope, providing us with a needful supply of food 
for the time being. 

The next day, forcing our crajt onward for six or eight miles, we 
brought to upon the left shore, where, after a short excursion among the 
hills, two other antelope were brought in^ which furnished us with a fur- 
ther supply of provisions. 

The day tbllowing; we continued our vovage till towards noon, when a 
high wind compelled us again to lay by under the lee of a small island. 

Here, towiuos night, having spread our robes near the camp fire, while 
all hands were busy at the boat, a sudden gust of wind bore the sparks 
among the dry grass, and in an instant the whole island was one sheet of 
flame ! robes, blankets, and all, were almost entirely destroyed, notwith- 
standing our prompt eflbrts to save them. 

Continuing on, the next morning we forced our boat, or rather carried it, 
down stream for about fifteen miles, — wading the river for nearly the whole 
distance. 

Our mode of voyaging was pretty much the same, each day of its con 
tinuance. Sailing was out of the question. 

Not unfrequenSy we were obliged to unload five or six times in the 
course of a few hours, in order to lift the boat over high sand-bars,— 
carrying its cargo upon our backs through the water a half-mile or more, to 
some dry place of deposit for the mean time ; then returning it in the like 
tiresome manner, — ^now in water up to our arm-pits, — ^then scarcely enough 
to cover the sand of the river bed. 

As for a channel there was none, or rather, there were so many we were 
at a continual loss which to choose. 

Now, gliding along merrily for a mile or two, we are brought to a hall 
fay the water scattering over a broad bed, and find ourselves snugly 
* pocketed,** with no other means of extrication than by backing out ; then, 
wading against a swift current, we retrace our steps for a like distance, 
and try another chiUCy perhaps with no better success ; — ^then, again, con- 
teying our landing to the nearest point of land, by means of hand-spikea 
anid levers, (requiring an exercise of the utmost strength J we force our 



HAHB FATE. 101 



^>^ ■^■ ^ M»*'rfM»^MMMM^^WMMI^i^^» 



empty craft over the shoals, and again load it, perhaps, to redact the same 
seene in a brief interval. 

Sometimes we were obliged to travel (for sach navigation as this was 
tenfold worse than travelling) four of five miles to make one mile headway. 
By crossing and re-cnissing a river varying in width from one to two miles— 
firat advancing, then retreating ; now taking to the right, then to the left ; 
now transverse, and then oblique, we wasted our time, strength, and pa- 
tience, in labor to little or no purpuse. No one, unless practi(^y expeii- 
enced, can have a correct idea of the beauties of such a voyage. 

Towards night, attracted by the appearance of a couple of bulls among 
the sand-hills, we brought to upon the left shore, and succeeded in kiUing 
one of them. 

A high wind the day following kept us encamped and aflbrded another 
opportunity for hunting. 

Improving the occasion to explore the countir northward, and obtain, if 
possible, some correct conception of its general character, a jaunt of four 
or five miles, over the bottom of rich alluvial soil skirting the river, ushered 
me into a high rolling prairie, partaking of the mixed nature of the garden 
and desert. 

. The hUls, in many places, were piles of sand or sun-baked clay, with 
scarcely a shrub or spire of grass to hide their nude deformity, while the 
space iM^tween them sported a rich soil and luxuriant vegetation, and was 
clothed in the verdure and loveliness of spring, and adorned with blushing 
wild-flowers in full bloom. 

Further on were yet higher summits, surmounted by pines and cedars, 
raising their heads in stately grandeur far above the sweet valleys at their 
feet 

Taken together, the scenery was not only romantic and picturesque, but 
bewitching in its beauty and repulsive in its deformity. 

The prevailing rock was a dark, ferruginous sandstone, and argillaceous 
limestone, interspersed with conglomerates of various kinds. 

Proceeding to a distance of about fifteen miles from the river, in hopes 
of finding game, I encountered nothing save a solitary band of wild horses, 
that fled across the sand-hills with the fleetness of the wind on my appear- 
ance, after which I returned to the boat much fatigued from the excursion. 

Our other hunters had also returned ; but neiuer of them with better 
success than myself. 

The subsequent morning we again renewed our voyaffe. Soon afler, an 
old bull presenting himself upon the river bank, we landed, and one of the 
crew approached hinv from the water-edge. 

The old fellow, unconscious of the danger ^hich threatened, permitted 
the hunter to advance till within three or four yards of him . The sharp crack 
of a rifle-shot first awoke him to a sense of his situation, when, reeling, he 
plunged headlong from the steep bank into the river. Our marksman, in 
an enbrt to dodge the falling beast, tumbled backwards into swimming wa- 
ter — ^lost his gun, and came very near being drowned. 

The buH made halt at a sand-bar, near by, and received nineteen shots is 
his carcase before he could be dispatched. 



192 IMPOSSIBLE TO PROCEED. 

When killed, his hams were found half eaten by wolves, and his 'vdiole 
body otherwise so badly mangled we left it unbutchered. 

In the afternoon, having pursned onr way eight or ten miles, we lay by 
for the night 

A high wind and rain during the three succeeding days prevented further 
pr^mss, and in the interval our provisions became again exhausted. 

while here, observing two Indians in the distance, running bu£ldo, I 
took three men and started to meet them. On coming up, we found an dd 
Indian witli his son engaged in butchering. Announcing the object of my 
▼isit to be the procurement of meat, they listened without a reply, but con- 
tinued their operations, — flaying the selections in two separate heaps. 

When finished, the old man led up his horse, and, pointing to an assorted 
pile, told me it was mine, and the animal also should be at my service to 
convey it to camp. 

His village, he remarked, was a long distance over the hills, on the 
watch for Pawnees, and though in a directly opposite course from us, he 
loved the white man and would give him meat and a horse to carry it 

Accepting the ofler of the generous-hearted savage, I took the heavy- 
laden horse and returned to the boat, — ^the owner following to regain his 
beast When arrived, he hinted at no remumeration for his kmdness, 
and mounting his horse, would have left for his village. 

Where wul you find among civilized people men thus generous and 
obliging ? Such cases are indeed rare. The savage here proved himself 
of more noble principles than nineteen-twentieths_ of his enlightened and 
chiifltianized brethren, whose religion teaches them to love their neighbor 
•8 themselves, and do to others as they would like to be done unto ! 

Unwilling that such disinterested kindness should ^ unrewarded, I made 
the old man some trifling presents, which he accepted with great pleasure, 
and, pressing his hand to his breast, exclaimed : " Chanta-ma warstaello !" 
(my heart is good !) and, shaking hands with the company, put whip to bis 
horse and was soon out of sight. 

It is useless to notice the particular progress of each day, or to state how 
many times we unloaded in the interim— how often we crossed the river, oi 
^ how far we carried our boat by main strength ; these things have been 
ahready laid before the reader sufficiently to give him some &int idea of the 
intolerable hardsliips and sufferings we were compelled to undergo. Each 
day was but a repetition of the toils and struggles of the preceding one. 

Neither would it be interesting to state the especial halfnday, day, or suc- 
cessive days we went without eating, meanwhile ; suffice it to say, the 
morning of tlie iOth of June found us at the mouth of a small creek upon 
the right shore, about two hundred miles below the Fort, — shaving been 
thirty-five days en barqueile^ and without eating for full one third of that 
time ! The expected spring rise had failed, and the river was very low and 
Btill falling, so that there was no possible chance of conveying our cargo to 
the States, as the most difficult part of the voyage lay vet before us. I ac- 
cordingly abandoned all thoughts of the latter, and aaopted such other 
rangements as my judgment suggested upon the premises. 



193 



CHAPTER XVIH. 

• 

Hunting excursion. — ^Thirst more painful than hunger. — Geological obeervationt.-. 
Moumiiil casualty. — Sad scene of sepulture. — ^Melancholy night. — Voyage in an 
empty boat — Ruins of a Pawnee village at Cedar Blufi! — Plover creek. CAcne 
Grove. — ^Thousand Islands. — Abandon boat — Exploring company. — A horrible litih 
atioH. — Agony to torment — Pawnee village. — £xem|dary benevMence of an Indian 
chief—Miserable fourth ot July. — Four days itarvation. — Arrival at Council 
Blufi! — Proceed to Independence. 

For two days precedmg we had been without eating, and our first eflSnt 
was to procure a re-supply of provisions. Both crews started oat with 
their rifles in pursuit of game, though not the foot-print of any living crea- 
ture appeared to excite even the faintest hope of success. 

Still, however, we kept on, determined not to despair so long as the use 
of legs remained to us. 

Having travelled some fifteen miles, chance threw in our way a doe-elk 
with her fawn, which the unerring aim of a rifle speedily laid dead before 
ns. Soon as opened, tlie liver disappeared at the demands of voracious ap- 
petites, and next to it the marrow bones and kidneys. 

The process of cooking was then commenced over a fire of bais de vachef 
which was continued till each stomach was abundantly satisfied. But, 
here another enemy assumed the place of hunger, and one far more painful 
in its nature. There was not a drop of water to allay our thirst short of 
the river, fifteen miles distant,-~over an open sand-prairie and beneath tiie 
scorching rays of a vertical sun. 

I can endure hunger for many days in succession without experiencing 
any very painful sensations, — I can lie down and forget it in tlie sweet un- 
consciousness of sleep, or feast my imagination upon the rich-spread tables 
of dreams ; — but not so with thirst. It cannot be forgotten, sleeping or 
waking, while existence is retained. It will make itself known and felt I 
It will parch your tongue and bum your throat, despite your utmost endeavors 
to thrust it from memory! 

Each one shouldering his burden fix>m the carcase, we took up our line of 
march for the boat, where, arriving in four or five hours subsequently, we 
quenched our burning thirst in the water of the thrice welcome stream. 

The country, travelled over during this excursion, for tlie first ten or 
twelve miles, was a level plain, presenting a thin vegetable mould with a 
luxuriant growth of grass and herbage, upon a substratum of sand and 
gravel. 

The remainder of our route led through a ridge of hills, many of them 
tiaked, others clothed with grass and ornamented with pines ; — between the 
tumuli were many beautiful vaUons, gorgeously decked with wild-flowers in 
full bloom, and arrayed in mantles of living green > while thick clusters of 
fruit-bearing trees and shrubs attested the general fecundity and lent their 
aochantment to the scene. » 

17 



194 MOURNFUL CASUALTY. 



4AMA^%^M«A««M#«««#WWMhAAM«WM«A^lM^IA# 



Beyond this a centle acclivity, that led to the high prairies, spread before 
the beholder a wUdemess of verdure, without one moving object to relieve 
its cheerless monotony. 

The boats were unloaded on our return and their contents placed in a 
compact pile upon shore, over which were spread two thicknesses of lodge- 
skin, to protect it from the weather. Other necessary arrangements were 
soon completed. Two men being selected to remain with me robas, two 
were dispatched to the Fort, while the remainder with myself were to make 
our way to the States, if possible, in an empty boat ^ 

Everything was put in order for departure the next morning, and a 
gloomy feeling pervaded each mind as the hour approached that was to 
separate a band so closely united by mutual sufferings, toil, and depriva- 
tion. 

Those selected to accompany me were congratulating themselves on the 
prospect of soon reaching the termination of their anluous and eventful 
expedition, among the friends and acquaintances of other days ; and none 
were more happy in the anticipation of this hoped for finale, than was a 
lively French youth, named Prudom. 

Notwithstanding the general tendency of circumstances was to produce 
feelings of melancholy, his voice rang loud in announcing the varied plans 
of amusement and pleasure, that were to be realized upon his arrival at 
home. 

For this day, so &r at least, he had been the petit gar^on of the company ; 
' and, it was frequently remarked, as his quaint expressions and sallies of wit 
burst upon the ear, ** What in the world is the matter with Prudom ? 

His good nature and kindness of disposition had won the esteem of all 
acquainted with him, while his cheerfulness and fortitude at all times con- 
tributed much to render tolerable the dreariness of our forlorn condition. 

A little before night, the company indulged in a general cleansing, ac- 
companied by a sluive and change of clothes. Prudom was among the 
number^ for whom an intimate fhend officiated as barber ; — the operation 
finished, he jokmgly remarked : 

*' Well, Tom, I suppose this is the last time you'll ever shave me !" 

Little did the poor fellow think how soon his words were to be v^fied. 
Seizing his rifle he stepped on board the boat, and, stooping to lay it by, 
exclaimed, *' Here's the game !" 

The words were scarcely uttered, when the gun-lock, coming in sudden 
contact with the boat-side, discharged the piece and shot him Sirough the 
heart ! He staggered, faltering forth ^ Mon Dieu !" and fell dead at my 
feet !" 

A thrill of horror struck every nerve on witnessing this tragical event. 
If we had previously felt melancholy, we now felt dismal and wobegone. 
He, who five minutes since was the very soul of cheerfulness and mirth, 
now lay a lifeless corpse ! How true it is, we " know not what a day or 
an hour may bring forth." 

The sun was just setting as we commenced digging a grave in which lo 
deposite all that remained of our friend and companion. 



HOW WE FARED. IM 

The task was a sad one, and as tedious as it was soriuwfuL We had 
neither shovel nor pick-axe, and were compelled to dig it with our batcher 
knives and hands. 

The pale-moon, new-risen, shed her sombre light over the dismal realms of 
Solitude, and an intervening cloud cast its pall-like shaddow npon the 
scene of sepulture, as we ^aid low the corse in mother dust No slvx^ud 
covered — no useless coflSn enclosed it, — a grave was the only gift within 
the power of friendship to bestow ! A thin coating of earth succeeded by 
a layer of stones and drift-wood, and that again by another earth-coat, was 
its covering, — ^then, the mournful task was done,— a tear dropt to the mem- 
ory of poor Prudom, and his body left to slumber in its narrow prison-house, 
till the sound of the last trump shall wake the dead to judgment* 

That night to us was a more painful one than any we had passed. A 
feeling of superstitious awe, mingled with thrilling sensations of grief 
and thoughts of our own miserable condition, occupied each mind and 
usurped Uie soothing powers of sleep. The dolesomc bowlings of the 
prairie-wolf, and hootings of the midnight owl, borne upon the listening 
air, kept sad condolence with our musings, and gave increased momen- 
tum to the pressure that crushed our spirits. Who could sleep, amid 
such scenes and surrounded by such circumstances ? 

The rising sun of the morrow brought the hour of separation, and ex- 
hibited upon every face the same downcast look, prefiguring the inward- 
workings of a mind absorbed in the melancholy of its own thoughts. 

Idy party consisted of six, some of whom were selected from the crew 
of our consort. We all embarked in one boat, taking with us a small 
quantity of robes, (our own individual property,) and a portion of the pro- 
visions at camp. 

Our voyage for a few days succeeding, was performed without much 
difficulty, except in the article of food — ^for, from this onward, till we 
finally reached the settlements, (an interval of twenty-eight days,) we 
were without eating full one half of the time ! 

Proceeding some thirty miles, we overtook the American Fur Com- 
pany's barges, three in number, the crews of which were struggling on 
in vain emrt to reach the States. We glided past them wiUi a loud 
huzza, and rallied the poor, toiling voffogeursj upon the futility of their 
exertions. 

Five or six days subsequently, w^ were, in turn, overtaken by them ;— 
they, like ourselves, abandoning all hope of accomplishing the objects of 
their voyage, had left their freight at Ash creek, under guard-— and, from 
that on, became our compagnons de voyage. 

The only game previous to reaching the forks of the Platte — a distance 
of some two hundred miles— was now and then an antelope, with a few 
Btragglinff deer. Our subsistence, meanwhile, was principally upon 
**^reens, and such roots as we had time and opportunity to gather. 

The country was pretty much of a uniform character, wiUi that pre* 
viously described. The rich alluvion of the river bottom reposed upon 
a varied substratum of sand, marl, gravel, and clay. 

* On my return the ensuing fall, I learned that the body of the unfortunate yoong 
— had been disinierred by wolves and devoured. 



OTf FOOT. 

I noticed ae? eral varieties of clays in the river banks exposed by the 
ftttritionof the water— of these were the white, red, black, yellow, blue, 
and green. 

TJm White clay is much used by the Indians in cleaning skins and robes ; 
an operation performed by mixing it with water till ihe compound as- 
■Hines the color and about four times the consistency of milk, when it is 
applied to the surface of the article in hand ; the robe or skin thus wash- 
ad, after being thoroughly dried in the sun, is rubbed until it becomes 
■oft and pliable from friction, and the grosser particles of the preparation 
are loosened and removed. 

By this simple process skins assume a milky whiteness, and every spot 
of grease or dirt is made to disappear. 

Ail kinds of skin may be thus cleansed, and wijl readily attain an un- 
■oiied purity, surpassing that originally possessed. Red, yellow, black* 
bine, or any other kind of clay, may be used for like purposes, and will 
readily impart to the cleansed articles their own color. 

In case a single application is insufficient, repeat the process for two 
or three times, and there can be no possible failure in tHe result, provid- 
ed the clay is pure and good. 

Some twenty miles above the Forks, we passed a ridge of rocky hills 
exhibiting layers of limestone and sandstone in bold escarpments, that 
jotting into the river from the right, formed a high embankment covered 
with pines and cedars, known as Cedar Bluff. 

At the upper side of this point stood the remains of an old Pawnee 
Tillage, which had been deserted by its inhabitants immediately after 
the bloody battle between that nation and the Sioux, at the mouth of Ash 
creek. 

The bottom, for several miles above, is rarely excelled in fertility. 
The islands are generally timbered, but the river banks upon both sides 
are almost entirely destitute of trees of any kind. 

From Cedar Blufl^ in about eight miles, we came to the mouth of a 
large and beautiful creek, forcing its way, with a clear and rapid current, 
from the high rolling prairies to the north. This presented the appear- 
ance of being skirted with broad and fertile bottoms, well supplied with 
timber among the hiUs. Though vested with some importance on ac- 
count of its size and locality, it is as yet nameless — ^the abundance of 
plovers in its vicinity at the time of my passing, suggested the term ** Plo- 
ver creek" as a proper appellation. 

Five or six miles further on, we came to a large grove of cottonwood 
upon the right shore. Here, some five years since, a company of traders, 
wlnle descending the Platte in boats loaded with furs, made c4che of one 
hundred and sixty packs of robes, which they were compelled to leave on 
account of the low stage of the water. The luckless party, after enduring 
great hardships, arriv^ in the States ; but their c&che was subsequently 
]iliudered by Pawnees. 

The confluence of the North and South Forks made but little perceptible 
diflerence in tiie size of the river. From the junction, in five days time 
we reached the vicinity of Grand Island, about two hundred and twenty 
■liles irom the nearest white settlements. 



EXPLORING EXPBa)inON. ^^ 

Tie hiffh prairie upon the north shore, between the above points, is geD« 
crally saiiav. The river preiients numeroos closters of islands, most of 
which are heavily Umbered and clothed with luxuriant growths of vegett« 
tion. The soil is of a deep, ra^ndy loam, and well adapted to cuhtvatioa 
I xH)ticed upon them several choice wild flowers of rare bsauty. 

We experienced great difficulty in forcing our boats through a lar^ 
group, tailed the " Thousand Islands," that toickly studded the river tor 
some tea miles, and, before clearing them, found our passage completely 
blockaded. 

Haviiig consumed an entire day in vain eflbrt to proceed, we were at 
length compelled to abandon ^e idea. The water was constantly falling, 
and our condition hourly becoming worse. This forced upon us the dernier 
resort of performing the remainder of our arduous journey on foot 

Accordingly, making clche of the personal property with us, we sunk our 
barges in a deep hole near by, threw all extra clothing into the river, and, 
each seleeting a robe with as much meat as he could carry, we commenced 
our weary tramp. 

The property thus disposed of was of the value of several hundred dollars. 
Among other articles left in c&che, were armd and tools of various kinds. 

No one would now carry a gun, — as we were to pass through a section 
of country destitute of game, and, being obliged to travel with all possible 
despatch to avoid starvation, good poUcy prompted us to dispense with every 
unnecessary encumbrance. For myself, however, I was unwilling to re- 
linquish my rifle, and determined to take it with me. 

There were fourteen of us, including the coups de harqueUe of the Ameri- 
can Fur Company ; and, as we trudged along at a pace enfeebled by a series 
(^ cruel hardships, &tigue, and starvation,— with provisions and beds bound 
in close bundles and strapped to our backs, — half-naked, long-bearded, care- 
worn, and haggard, — we looked like the last remnants of hard times ! 

The 28th of June dated the commencement of this last stage of our tire- 
some pilgrimage. 

Having travelled some ten or twelve miles, we espied a camp of whites 
a short distance in advance, and were observed by them almost at the same 
time. Our appearance created an evident consternation, — ^their horses were 
driven in with great speed, and their guns stripped ready for action, wliile 
our or five men, mounted upon fleet chargers, rode out to reconnoitre. 

On ascertaining the cause of their alarm to be only a handful of unarmed 
men, they ventured up, and were saluted with the cordiality of old acquain- 
tances, so rejoiced were we at the sight of anything savoring of the endear- 
ments of home and civilization. 

The company proved one in the employ of the United States Grovemment, 
under the command Lieut. J. C. Fremont, of the Corps of Topographical 
Engineers, on an expedition for the exploration and survey of the country 
laying between the Missouri river and the mountains. 

The commandant seemed a gentlemtCn of urbanity and intelligence, and 
politely furnished us with aU the passing news of the day preceding his 
ceparture from the States. 

Our smokers and tobacco-chewers, who had been for sometime without 
the sfna qua rum of the mountaineer, now procured a re-supply for the indul- 
gence of their filthy and unnatural taste. 

17* 



lOB INDUN KINDNESS. 

Leaving our new-found friends, we continued on for a few miles, and 
halted a brief interval under the shade of a cottonwood grove. While thofl 
leclining upon the green grass, what was our surprise at seeing thzee In^ 
dians, who appeared suddenly in our midst extending their hands to greet 
us! 

They belonged to a war-party of Chyennes, — ^had been to the Pawnees, 
and were now on their return, with three horses captured from the enemy. 

Continuing our course, towards sundown I began to find my rifie rather 
cumbersome, and, yielding to the advice of all hands, threw it away. 

Having travelled till late at night, we laid ourselves down in the trafl 
for repose; — the musquetoes, however, together with the heat, were so 
annoymg, sleep was impossible. 

I never in my life before was so tortured by these relentless persecutors. 
Their sting was far more tolerable to me than the unending hum of their 
music. To exterminate them was a hopeless task, for, at the death of one, 
fifty would come to its funeral, — and to submit quietly to their rapacity and 
be eaten up alive by such loving friends, was more than human fiesh and 
blood could endure. 

For three hours I lay, sweltered by the heat and pierced by the hungry 
myriads that swarmed around, until my agony became so great it obtained 
the mastery of reason, and I was scarcely self-conscious whether a being 
of earth or an inhabitant of the realms of woe. 

In the height of my phrenzy I &ncied four demons had hold of the ex- 
tremities of my robe, and were fiercely dragging me over a prairie of sharp 
rocks, that tore my fiesh at every bound. The remainder of the party sul* 
fered equally with myself, and none of them were permitted to close their 
eyes that night 

JujiA 29^. We started at early day, and pursued our journey till ten 
o'clock, which brought us to the foot of Grand Island, — a distance of sup^ 
fiiifef from the place of our adventure with the Indians during the previous 
afternoon. Here we indulged in a slight repast, and, reclining upon the 
grass, enjoyed a few hours' sleep, despite the continued annoyance of mus- 
quetoes. 

On arousing to resume the painful march, our legs were found in a very 
unenviable plight, and almost refused to sustain the accustomed burthen. 
Our feet, also, (softened i^id made tender by the mollifying effects of the 
water, to which they had been so long familiar, and, unus^ to the offices 
now newly forced upon them,) were sore and swollen to a frightful size. 
From this on, our journey was most intensely painful. 

But, notwithstanding all, we were compelled to keep moving, tliong^ our 
progress seemed more like the passage of Mahomet's *^ bridge of swords " 
than aught else imaginable. 

JvXy 2d» This morning our stock of provisions was entirely exhausted, 
and yet a long distance intervened between us and the settlements. 

Towards night, however, chance brought us in the way of a plentifol 
supper, by our encountering the Pawnee village on its way to the buf- 
fido range. We were entertained by the head chief in a hospitable 
manner, who furnished us bountifully with boiled com and mush; and 



PART COMPANY. 199 

we were also invited into Beveial shantees with the Btaoe kind in- 
tention, y^ 
' The Pawnee chief (Red Eaele, if my recollection eenres me rig^t) 
was a generous old fellow, ag^ some sixty years. His benevolence 
was tnuy exemplary, as his conduct well attested. Mv moccasins, be- 
ing much worn by long usage, exposed to the ground the bottoms of 
my feet. This was no sooner discovered by the noble-hearted old nuudy 
than he pulled off his own (a pair of new ones) and gave them to me ! 
What white man would have done the like? £ad this was d<Hie 
by the poor Indian, not from the expectation of reward, but through the 
promptings of an innate benevolence ! A small tin-cup, taken with me/ 
thus &r, was the only return in my power to make. 

Leaving the village a litde before sundown, we encamped for the 
night near the houses recently occupied by these Indians, after having 
travelled seven or eight miles. Their buildings are coniform, and cm^ 
structed of earth ana timber, very similar to moee of the Kansas tribe, 
described in a previous chapter. 

Several years ago, the pawnees were a numerous and powerful na- 
tion, possessing an extensive territory, and occupying five large towns, 
viz : one upon the Republican branch of the Kansas river, one at the 
forks of the Platte, one south of the Arkansas near the Cumanche coun- 
try, one on Loup creek, and one some ninety miles above the mouth of 
the Platte. These several divisions were known by the terms of Pic, 
Mahah, Republican, Loup, and Grand Pawnees. The Riccaiees, speaking 
the same lanmiage, may aJso be reckoned a fraction of this tribe. The 
five villages before named are now reduced to two, i. e. on Loup creek and 
above the mouth of the Platte. 

The whole number of the Pawnee nation, exclusive of the Riccarees, 
probably does not exceed six thousand souls. All of the western tribes 
being at war with them, their numerical strength is continually dimin- 
ishing. 

Slight advances have been made towards improving the condition of this 
nation, but, as yet, with little apparent success. A farmer, blacksmith, and 
schoolmaster are provided them under the patronage of the U. S. Govern- 
ment, and a missionary is also stationed among them by the American 
Board of Foreign Missions. 

They raise corn * and other vegetables, but their principal dependence 
for sulisistence is upon the proceeds of hunting. Their general charaf^ter 
is stamped with indolence, treachery and cowardice, for which they have 
become famous, not only among the whites, but also ameng their rude 
neighbors, — shaving thus attained the hatred of both. 

July 3d, This morning we ^rted company, and each of us undertook 
io m&e his way to Council JBluff according to the best of his ability. 
Bein£r entirely destitute of food, it became us to urge our course with all 
possible dispatch. 

*I noticed one cornfield, near the village, that contaiued eixty acres or nioie« and 
ia appeaiance savored much of civilized agriculture. 



aOO NOTES BY THE WAY. 

My 4A. Accompanied by two othen, in an equally forlorn ^^^»Mlitifnt 
tlie " glorious fourth " finds me plodding along, over an open prairie, be- 
neath the scorching rays of a summer's sun, unarmed, halfnuuced, with a 
■honldered pack, and not having had a morsel to eat for the past two days. 

It is now I think of the festu boards and scenes of good cheer so omni- 
present upon Freedom's birth-day in the land of my nativity ! Mine is 
a mode of celebrating Independence, that I care not ever again to observe. 

On the 6th we reached the Ottoe mission and obtained food, after an ab- 
ftinence of four successive days. 

Early in the morning of the 7th we arrived at Council Bluff on the 
Missouri, eight miles above the mouth of the Platte, luid nearly four huB- 
dred above Fort Leavenworth. In the course of the day following our 
whole party came in, one after another — some of whom had become so 
weakened by hardship and deprivation they could scarcely move a doaea 
yards without stumbling! 

Having remained a few days at Council Bluff to recruit our strength, ym 
procured canoes and descended the Missouri. The 21st inst. found me at 
Independence, Mo., after an absence of nearly nine months, — shaving con- 
sumed seventy-five days upon my return voyage, and, in the meantime, ez- 
periencea a series of sufi^ring and misfortunes seldom equalled and rarelgr 
surpassed. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

The country between the Pawnee village and Bellevieu, and from that to Fort 
Leavenworth. — Leave Independence for the Mountains. — ^Meet Pawnee*. — ^In- 
dian hospitality.— Journey up the South Fork Platte.— Fort Grove. — Beaver creek. 
—Bijou. — Chabonard's camp.— Clountry described. — Medicine Lodge. — ^The Chy^ 
ennes ; their character and history.— Arrive at Fort Lancaster.— Difibrent localitiBB 
in its neighborhood.«-Fatal IHieL— Rmos. 

The country travelled over from the Pawnee villa^ j to Council BlufiT 
^or Bellevieu, as more recentiy called) is generally possessed of a rich, 
clayey soil, which is well adapted to cultivation. 

Large quantities of timber skirt the- streams, that include aJl the varie- 
ties found in the States. The landscape is beautifully undulating, and, al 
the time of our passing it, was covered with a luxunant growth of vege- 
tation, (the grass being frequently waist high,) and ornamented by ran 
specimens of wild fiowers. 

The Pawnees, Ottoes, and Omahas possess the whole extent of this tev- 
*itory, which embraces much valuable land within its limits. That north 
of the river and adjacent to Bellevieu is owned by the PottowatomieSy w^ 
also claim to the boundary between Iowa and Missouri. 



• •• 

• •• • 

• • • • • * • 

• •• • • 

• •• 

• * • 

• •• ,- 

• • • 



• • • < 



• •• 



• • t> ft 
• •• t 



«•»« 



VKEXSIfiCTED ENCOUNTEB. 20S 

The Kickapoos, lowaa, Sacs, and Foxes occupy the country soutl) of the 
Missouri, from the mouth of the Platte to FortXeavenWorth. 

All of this interval possesses a fertile soil, is well watered and passably 
Well timbered. A more particular description of it, however, does not prop- 
erly come within the limits of this work. 

Upon my arrival at Independence, affairs were in a rather confused stateii 
Times were hard and all kmds of. business at their lowest ebb. The com- 
pany for which I had acted had become bankrupt, and left me a loser to no 
mcouiiiderable amount But, notwithstanding this un&vorable aspect of 
things, I decided upon returning to the Mountains for the purpose of visit- 
ing tiie different regions adjacent to them. 

Acting upon this resolution, I expended the means at my immediate com- 
mand for the procurement of an outfit ; — and the beginning of August saw 
me again en rotde, accompanied by two experienced mouittaineers — all of 
us mounted upon hardy mules ana well provided for the journey before us. 

Hie first four or five days subsequent, our process was much impeded 
by successive rains, that rendered the road muddy and ourselves uncom- 
fortable. We were necessitated to raft the Wakarousha, and the Kansas 
was so swollen it was forded with great difficulty, — the water frequently 
Covering the backs of our animals. 

Fropa that onward we enjoyed pleasant weather and journeyed without 
further interruption; — jiothinff occurred worth note, till we reached the 
Pawnee range, near the head of Big Blue. 

One morning, while travelling aloi^ unconcernedly and at our leisure, 
having as yet observed nothing to excite our apprehensions, a Pawnee sud- 
denly made his appearance directly in front of us. 

Such a customer had we been aware of his prpximity, would have been 
most carefully avoided, in a place so dangerous as this ; but, as he had first 
discovered us, it was now too late to give him the slip, and we accordingly 
permitted his approach, greetmg him in a friendly manner. ^ 

He immediately informed us that the whole country was full of his peo- 
ple returning from their summer-hunt, and he invited us to accompany nim 
to the \^age. This we declined, being unwilling to trust either him or 
his people. 

Observing several other "shaved heads" hurrying towards us from otttP 
the adjoining hills, we struck camp and prepared for the expected rencoux>- 
ter. Upon coming near, however, they appeared friendly and were most 
of them unarmed. Again we were urged to visit the village. 

After waiting an hour or more, we resumed our course, still followed by 
the unwelcotne visitors. A ride of scarcely a half mile brought us to the 
top of a hill, and, to our surprise, placed us in the immediate precincts of 
the village, — too far advancea for a retreat 

The entire population was instantly in motion, and came crowding to- 
warda us upon every side. Pushing boldly forward, we were received by 
the same kind-hearted old chief of whom I had occasion to speak in the 
preceding chapter. On recognizing me, I was welcomed with great cor- 
oiality, and we were forthwith conducted to his shantee and sumptuously 
entertained upon the choicest in his possession. 



204 JOURNEY UP SOUTH FORK PLATTE. 

Oar camp-equipage and other articles were all safely disposed of, and 
nothing conducive to our pleasure or comfort was left unattended to. Dor* 
log oar entire stay, we were beset with invitations to feasts which were 
prepared expressly for us by these hospitable villagers, who appeared dis* 
pleased whenever we declined their acceptance. 

The old chief brought forward his little grandson to shake hands with 
ns — ^remarkmg, that he would teach his children like himself to love the 
Americans. 

A small sack filled with papers was then laid before me for perusal 
They consisted of recommendations, sneaking in very flattering terms of 
the bearer, Red Eagle, and belauding his kindness and Uberality. Most 
willingly would I have complied with his request, and made " the paper 
talk " for him, but the means were not at hand. 

The kind-hearted old man presented us each a pair of moccasios 
and urged our stay till the next morning, — adding : '*Some of my men are 
bad, and my heart is sick for them. Should you go before sleep, they 
might follow and rob you. When the morrow's sun has newly risen above 
the prairie, they will have left their foot-prints in the homeward trail, and 
my white brothers may pass unmolested. But, if you will not rest beneath 
the shade of the Red Eagle, wait till the day -king is low, then ride fast till 
the night is old, and thus may you avoid the evil ones who would iiq'uxe 
you." 

This advice seemed so reasonable, we consented to remain till late in the 
afternoon, when, driving up our animals, we made preparations to start 

Every article belonging to us was faithfully returned by the old man, 
who ordered for us a present of bufiklo meat. Several large pieces were 
accordingly brought by difierent individuals, of excellent quality, and in 
quantity more than we could well carry. 

This was all a free gift, — no one even hinted at a compensation. Where 
will vou find among civilized man generosity and hospitality equal to this? 

WilHng to reward such exemplary conduct, we presented the liberal 
donors with a small supply of sugar, cofi^e, and tobacco ; and, to our host, 
we gave a knife and some other trifling articles, all of which he received 
with evident gratification. 

Bidding the noble chieftain adieu, we pursued our course in accordance 
with bis direction, — ^travelling nearly all night 

Early the next morning we struck the Platte, and, in the afternoon, 
reached the point at whicn myself and others had abandoned our boats. 

On visiting the cfi-che made at that time, not a thing remained ;— it 
had been robbed by the Pawnees, in all probability, as the island was 
covered with the tracks of men and horses. But what aflbrded still 
more conclusive evidence, was the site of a recent Pawnee encamp- 
ment within some four hundred yards of the place. 

The next morning brought us to the buf&lo range, and our fare was ona 
of continued fesi^ting from that onward. 

Three days subsequently we came to the forks of the Platte, and con- 
tinued up the south branch, with the design of proceeding to New Mexico 
by way of Fort Lancaster. , 



MEETING AGAIN. 

Here we entered a stretch of territory not as yet brought before the read- 
er*s notice. 

I Passing on, a ride of between fifty and Fixty miles brought ns to a large 
|Tove of willows at the mouth of a sand-creek, where we remained the day 
following. 

The vicinity contained the relics of three or four ladiaii forts, cob* 
rtmcted of logs,—one or two of which were in an almost entire state of 
preservation, and afibrded a correct illustration of Indian military genius. 
Their forms were oval, and the roofage so complete, wd were amply 
sheltered in one of them from a heavy shower which fell during our stay. 

From this point (properly denominated Fort Grove) to the forks, the 
country is rather sterile and rolling, with the exception of the river bottoms, 
which, as usual, are possessed of a rich soil and vary in width from one to 
five miles. There is scarcely a tree, worth naming, upon either bank of 
the river for the whole extent 

The expanse lying to the northward is quite broken and hilly, with some 
few pines and cedars at the headis of ravines. 

Previous to leaving Fort Grove I experienced an attack of the fever and 
ague, which recurred, at intervals of once in two days, until we reached 
Fort Lancaster. 

Resuming our journey, a ride of some ten miles brought us to the mouth 
of Pole creek, a large affluent of the right shore. This is a clear and 
handsome stream, running through a rich valley of considerable width. Its 
entire course afibrds but very lime timber, and the prairie upon either side 
is generally sandy and barren. 

Journeying on about seventy-five miles further, we came to a large stream 
called la Fouchett aux Castors, or Beaver Fork. 

This creek heads in the highlands between the Platte and Arkansas, and 
traces its course through a sandy country, varied by diminutive hills of 
clayey soil, for a distance of nearly two hundred miles. It presents many 
beautiful bottoms of a rich vegetable mould, with here and there small clus- 
ters of timber. 

Some forty or fifty miles above Beaver creek, we crossed Bijou, anotiier 
large affluent of the left shore. The water at the mouth of this stream was 
sh^ow, dispersing itself in several small channels, over a bed of gravel and 
quicksand, about four hundred yards wide, and enclosed by abrupt bank* 
of clay and sand. 

For several miles above its junction with the Platte no timber appears ; 
but further on, many large groves relieve the eye, and invite the traveller to 
their shade, while broad meadowi^ and rich bottoms, clothed with grass ani 
flowers, cheer the beholder and delight his fancy. 

Aug, 30lk, A ride^of ten or fifteen miles, from this point, brought us to a 
eamp of whites, in the employ of Bent and St. Vrain, occupying a small 
island in the Platte. They were guarding a quantity of robes with which 
they had attempted to descend the river, but were unable to proceed further 
on account of low water. 

I was much gratified at here meeting an old acquaintance, with whom I 
had passed a portion of the previous winter upon White river 

18 



306 MEDICINE LOIXSE. 

The camp was under the direction of a half-breed, named Chabonard, 
who proved to be a gentleman of saperior information. He had acquired a 
classic education and could converse quite fluently in German, Spanish, 
French, and English, as well as several Indian languages. His mind, ^so, 
was well stored with choice reading, and enrichedby extensive travel and 
observation. Having visited most of the important places, both in Eng- 
land, France, and Germany, he knew how to turn his experience to good 
advantage. 

There was a quaint humor and shrewdness in his conversaticmy-so garbed 
with intelligence and perspicuity, that he at once insinuated himself into 
the good graces of listeners, and commanded their admiration and respect 

The country, between Fort Grove apd Cabonard's camp, with the excep- 
tion of the river bottoms, (which were quite fertile and occupied an area, 
upon both banks, varying in width from one hundred yards to five miles,) 
is slightlv undulating, and presents two uniform characteristics, — one, a 
thin clayish loam upon a subtratum of sand and gravel, and the other a 
sandy surfoce, often entirely destitute of vegetation, save, perchance, a 
few scattering spires of coarse grass and a species of prickly burr. 

Various specimens of cacti are found in every direction, and prove a 
frequent source of vexation to the traveller. The landscape discloses a 
scene of dreary sterility, — more to be accounted for by the dryness of the 
climate than any natural defect in the soil. 

The river upon both sides is nearly destitute of timber, and we wrae 
frequently compelled to use bois de vache for cooking purposes. There is 
also a scarcity of rock, — though, in the neighborhood of Bijou, I observed 
a kind of grayish sandstone, exposed to view in the beds, of ravines ; uid, 
directly opposite Chabonard's camp, the action of the waters had formed a 
steep wall, some thirty or forty feet high, which disclosed a large bed of 
sandstone and slate, with earthy limestone. 

A few miles above Beaver Fork, we obtsuned a distinct view of the main 
ridge of the Rocky Mountains with the snowy summit of Long's Peak, 
distant some sixty or sixtyrfive miles. They appeared like a pile of dark 
clouds just rising from the verge of the horizon, and could be identified^nly 
by their uniform and stationary position. 

Froii) the time of first entering the buflalo range till we reached Bijou 
creek, our entire course was beset with dense masses of those animals, 
whicii covered the river bottoms and prairies in all directions, far as the 
eye could reach. Our usual practice was to kill one every day, and select 
from its carcase the choice portions so well known and highly appreciated 
by mountaineers ; and, calling to aid the varied modes of cooking peculiar 
to hunters, surely never did epicures fare better than we. 

A few miles above Beaver creek we passed the site of a recent Indian en* 
campment, where was yet standing the frame-work of a medicine lodge, 
erected by the Chyennes and Arapahos for the performance of their mli- 
g^ous rites and ceremonies. This was made of light poles, describing an 
amphitheatre with a diameter of some fifty feet. In form it was much like 
tiw pavilion of a circus, and of su&cient dimensions to contain several 
kndred indivkluals* 



SKETCH OF THE CHYENNES. 207 

I shall take occasion in subsequent pages to speak of medicine-making't 
and would refer the reader to that part for an explanation of the peculiar 
paiposes for which the medicine loage is constructed. 

The river at Chabonard's camp is reduced fully one half in width, com* 
pared with its size at the forks. The current is also clearer and more 
rapid. Its banks and islands are much better timbered, and its general ap- 
pearance indicates an approach to the mountains. ^ 

About noon we bade &rewell to our new friends, by whom we had been 
kindly entertained, and resumed our journey, accompanied by my whilom 
companion and two others, — ^increasin^ our number to six. 

Towards sundown, coming to a smafi village of Chyennes, we passed the 
night in the lodge of a chie^ called the Tail Soldier. Our host treated ub 
with much civihty, but in this he appeared actuated only by selfish motives, 
and with the sole view of extorting a more^than fourfold equivalent by 
way of presents. 

We were also continually harassed by beggars from all quarters, and 
gladly availed ourselves of the first dawn of the ensuing morning to pass 
on, and thus escape their importunities. 

The Chyennes at this time occupy a portion of the Arapaho lands, bor- 
dering upon the South Fork and its affluents. 

Some six or eight years since, they inhabited the country in the vicinity 
of the Chyenne and White rivers and the North Fork of Platte, from whence 
they were driven by the hostile incursions of the Sioux, who now hold in 
quiet possession the whole of that territory. 

This tribe, in general appearance, dress, and habits, assimilates most of 
the mountain and prairie Indians, with the single exception, perhaps, of b&- 
ing meaner than any other. They are certamly more saucy as beggars, 
and impudent and daring as thieves, than any other I ever became acquainted 
with. 

Formerly they were a much better people, but the contaminating eflects 
of intercourse with the whites have made a disposition, naturally bad, im- 
measurably worse. Contrary to Indian character in general, they are 
treacherous and unworthy of trust, at all times and in all places. 

Their history contains a small speck of romance, which may not prove 
altc^ther uninteresting to the curious. 

The Chyennes, at the present time, number about four hundred lodges, 
and claim some eight hundred warriors. The tribe is composed of two 
divisions, viz : the Chyennes and Gros Ventres, — ^both speaking the same 
language and practising the same designation of nationahty, shown in 
sundry transverse scars upon the left arm. 

Neither of these divisions know their origin, but tell the following curious 
stoiy of their first intercourse with each other. 

Many years since, the Chyennes, while travelling from a north country, 
discovered the Gros Ventres^, who were also upon a journey. As usual 
among strange tribes, both parties rushed to the attack, and a bloody battle 
Would undoubtedly have been the result, had it not been stayed by the ma- 
tual discovery of an identity of language. Upon this, hostility at once gave 



208 A BROKEN COMPANY. 

i 

glace to friendship, and the' two parties negotiated an immediate nmon. 
ince then they have been considered as one nation. 
What is most singular in this occurrence, neither the Gros Ventres nor 
Chyennes could trace any previous connection or intercourse with each 
other, or knowledge of their individual existence. 

This tribe has made no advances in civilization, and most probably will 
make none for manv years to come. Their roving and unsettled habits 
prove an obstacle, almost insuperable, to any efforts that may be underta- 
ken for their improvement 

They are generally accounted friendly to the whites, but friendship like 
this is essentially of a dangerous character. 

Continuing our journey, the evening of Sept 2d brought us to Fort 
Lancaster, after an interval of twenty-six days, during which we had 
travelled not far from seven hundred and twenty mUes. 

Our route from Chabonard's camp to this point, for the most part, led 
along the vallev of the Platte, which resembled a garden in the splendor of 
its fields and the variety of its flowers. 

A ride of four or &ve miles took us across the dry bed of a large sand- 
creek, four or five hundred ysurds wide, known as the Ku3rawa. The banks 
of this arroyo are very steep and high, disclosing, now and then, spreads of 
beautiful bottom lands with occasional groves of cottonwood. At this sea- 
son of the year its waters are lost in the quicksand and gravel. 

We also passed the mouths of three lai|;e affluents of the right bank 
of Platte, severally known as Crow' creek, Ciche a la Poudre, and Thomp- 
son's Fork. 

These creeks rise in the adjoining mountains, and, with the exception of 
Crow creek, trace their way with clear and rapid currents, from two to 
three feet deep and sixty feet wide, over beds of sand and pebbles. Th^ 
valleys are broad, ridh, and for the most part well timbered. 

Timber increases in quantity, upon the Platte and its affluents, as the 
traveller approaches the mountains, and the soil gradually loses that with- 
ering aridity so characteristic of the grand prairie. 

Twelve miles below Fort Lancaster we passed Fort George, a large 
trading poet kept up by Bent and St Vrain. Its size rather exceeds that of 
Fort Platte, previously described; it is built, however, after the same 
fashion, — as, in fact, are all the regular trading posts in the country. At 
this time, fifteen or twenty men were stationed there, under the command 
of Mr. Marsalina St Vrain. 

Six miles further on, we came to a recently deserted post, which had 
been occupied the previous winter and summer by Messrs Lock and Ran- 
dolph. 

One of our party, a whilom engage of this company, informed me of its 
principals* becoming bankrupt, through mismanagement and losses of various 
kinds; — he stated, tiiat, in May last, their entire '' cavalUard,'* consisting ot 
forty-five head of horses and mules, had been stolen by the Sioux Indians; 
this, in connection with other bid luck — together with the depreciated value 
of furs and peltries, the fiiilure of a boat-load of robes to reach the 
States, the urgent demands of creditors, &c., had caused them to evacuate 
tbeir post and quit the country. 



RUINS. ao9 

A short distance above this, at a point of timber occupying a large bot- 
tom, had been the scene of a fJEital dael the previous winter, between two 
whites by the names of Herring and Beer. On my first arrival in the 
country 1 had become acquainted with both of the actors, and felt much in* 
terested in the details of the bloody afiair as related by one present at the 
time of its unfortunate occurrence. The difficulty between them related 
to a Mexican woman from Taos, — ^the wife of Herring. 

Backed by a number of personal friends, and anxious to obtain the lady 
from her husband, the former had provoked a quarrel and used very insult- 
ing language to Ids antagonist. This was received with little or no reply, 
but soon, however, resulted in a challenge which was promptly accepted. 

The preUminaries were arranged in confident expectation of killing Her- 
ling, who was considered a pocnr marksman, especially at an off-hand shot. 
The weapons selected by Beer were rifies, the distance fifty yards, the man- 
ner offhand, and the time of shooting between the word fire and thzee* 
The two met, attended by their friends, at the time and place agreed upon^ — 
at the word '*^re," the ball of Beer's rifle was buried in a cottonwood a 
few inches above the head of his antagonist, — at the word *^ three" the con- 
tents of Herring's rifle found lodgement in the body of Beer, who fell and 
expired in a few minutes. 

Between this point and Fort Lancaster, I noticed the ruins of another 
trading post, much dilapidated in appearance, and nearly levelled with the 

giovmd. 

Passing along, I could not refrain from musing upon the frequent deeds 
of mischief and iniquity that had originated within them, in connection with 
^he infamous liquor traffic. Ah, thought I, were those bricks possessed of 
U^nmeSi full many a tale of horror and g^lt would they unfold, to stand 
the listener's '' hair on end," and make his blood run cold ! But, lost in 
^ilent unconsciousness, they refuse to fipeak the white man's shame ! 

18* 



210 



CHAPTER XX. 

Old acqiiftint<tnces.-!-Indian muiden. — ^Mode of tmTeUing in a dangerans eaaauj,-^ 
Mexican traders. — Summary way of teaching manneri. — Fort Lancaster and snr- 
rounding country. — Resume journey. — Cherry creek and connecting obaervatifflis.F~ 
Sketch of the Arapahoe, their country, character, &c. — Camp of free trader^"- 
Bbckfoot camp. — Dangherty's creek.— Observations relative to the I>ivide.-~Mex- 
ican cupidity.— Strange visitors. — The lone traveUers. — Arrive at the Ariauune.— 
General remarks. — Curious specimens of cacti •^•Fontaine qui Bouit, or Natural 
Soda-fountain. — Indian superstition. — Enchanting scenery. — ^Extraordinary waD of 
mndstone. 

At Fort Lancaster I was gratified by meeting with several acquaintances 
of the previous winter, two of whom had been comrades during a part 
of my unfortunate and adventurous voyage down the Platte. 

My appearance created no little surprise and pleasure, on all sides. 
Queries of various kinds were industriously plied, relative to the latest 
news from the States, and also in reference to the miseries and hardships 
undergone during the interval of my absence. The dangers of our mode 
of travelling were freely expatiated upon, and numerous instances of recent 
Indian hostilities cited to prove our '*fool daring." 

Among the latter was an outrage perpetrated by the Chyennes, only two 
weeks previous, in the murder of three white men, — one of whom was the 
oldest trapper in the mountains, and had been for some time engaged in the 
fur trade. 

The murderers had the impudence to ask a scalp-feast from the com- 
mandant of the Fort, according to custom in case of overcoming their ene- 
mies in battle ! The hair, however, bein? recognized as that of a white 
man, no feast was given. When accused of the murder, they apologized 
by saying the poor fellow was suffering greatly at the time from recent 
wounds, and they had killed him out of pity ! 

In our mode of travelling, we always used due precaution to avoid sur- 
prise and attack. This is easily done, while among buffalo, by noticing 
their movements, — as these animals invariably flee across the wind upon 
the approach of man, and neither Indians nor whites can traverse their 
range without setting the whole country ini motion. 

We obser\'od another plan of caution by frequently ascending some emi 
nence, and scanning the wide expanse, far and near. 

Our general practice was to travel till night, and camp without fire in the 
open prairie, thus precluding the possibility of being discovered, even though 
in the immediate vicinity of Indians. 

A party of three or four men can pass through a dangerous countiy and 
avoid coming in contact with enemies, provided they exercise a needful vigi- 
lance much more easily than one of larger numbers. With a large company 



MEXICANS IN THE MOUNTAINS. 211 

too much dependence is reposed in each other, which soon resolts in indb- 
▼idual carelessness and neglect. Added to this, they are apt to rely upon 
their numerical strength, and, forgetting this simple truism, that ** caution is 
the parent of safety," rush into (Ekngcr when they are least a\%are of it. It 
thus occurs that large parties are more liable to surprise than smallei 
ones, and more frequently sufier losses from the depredations of prowling 
enemies. 

On the contrary, where but three or four individuals are travelling together, 
they trust exclusively to their own personal vigilance. Keenly alive to 
every suspicious appearance, they seldom fail to discover the presence of 
danger without exposing themselves, and may avoid it by a timely retreat 
or change of course. 

There is little risk in an open prairie, in case an enemy is first seen by 
the party wishing to shun his presenc^; — they have only to manoeuvre in 
such a manner as to elude observation, (a thing not often difficult,) and all 
is safe. In subsequent travels through dangerous countries I have always 
acted upon these suggestions, and never yet found them to fiiil. 

Some twelve or fifteen Mexicans were at this time present at the Fort 
They constituted a trading party from Taos, escorting a caravan of pack- 
horses and mules, laden with flour, com, bread, beans, onions, dried 
pumpkin, salt, and pepper, to barter for robes, skins, furs, meat, moccasins, 
bows and arrows, ammunition, guns, cofiee, calico, cloth, tobacco, and old 
clothes, which were to compose their return freight. 

A worse looking set was here presented than that previously described 
in the second chapter of this volume. Some of them were as black as 
veritable negroes, and needed only the curly hair, tiiick lips, and flattened 
nose, to defme the genuine Congo in appearance. A more miserable loDk* 
ing gang of filthy half-naked, ragamuffins, I never before witnessed. 

Their cargoes had already been disposed of at various prices, according 
to circumstances. Flour and meal were sold at from four to six dollars per 
fanegOy (one \iundred and twenty pounds,) and other articles at like prices. 
Their first asking price was at the rate of twenty dollars per/zn^a; bat 
an aflray which occurred with a small party of Americans, immediately 
upon their arrival, had made those produce merchants much more reasonable 
in their demands. 

The particulars of the afiair were rather disgraceful to both parties. 
The Americans, anxious to purchase a quantity of flour, ofiered to take it 
at the asking price, provided the Mexicans would receive their pay in robes 
of a rather indiflerent quality. This the latter refused and a dispute arose, 
when insulting language was used on both sides, coupled witli threats of 
mutual injury. 

The Mexicans retired a short distance and camped, — soon after the 
Americans, four in number, rushed among them and drove off their entire 
cavaUardy containing twenty head of horses and mules. The Mexicans 
seized their arms for resistance, and the commandante advancing demanded 
of the nearest assailant : 

** Que quiere, cabellero ?" (what do you want, sir ?) 

^'Yotenga lo caballardo, — porque dicirmeesta?" (I have your horses^ 
why do you ask ?) 



tt2 roBT LANCASTER, ETC. 

^ Ctrraho, Americanl !" said the Mexican, levelling his gun at the apeaksr. 
In an instant a pistolnihot from the latter laid him prostrate*— 4he hall en^ 
terinff his chest near the heart No further resistance was ofined, aadthe 
assaiknts retured with dieir booty. 

The .next morning, however, they returned, and the two parties com* 
promised the matter by certain conciliatory arrangements, which resulted ia 
the Americans giving up the captured animals, on condition that the Mexi- 
cans should in future be less insolent and conduct their trade on nune 
reasonable terms. 

The wounded man recovered in three or four weeks, and was now ready 
to accompany his party on their homeward-bound journey. 

A large number of Mexicans are employed at the difieient trading posts 
in this vicinity. They prove quite useful as horse-guards, and also in 
taking care of cattle and doing the drudgery connect^ with these estab* 
lishments. 

Their wages vary from four to ten dollars per month, which they receive 
in articles of traffic at an exhorbitant price ; — ^viz : calicoes, (indiflerent 
quality,) from fifty cents to one dollar per yard ; blue cloth, from live to ten 
Gollars per do. ; powder, two dollars per lb, ; lead, one do. do. ; cc^Bfee, one 
da do. ; tobacco, from two to three da da ; second hand robes, two dollars 
apiece, — and everything else in proportion. 

Their wages for a whole year, in actual value, bring them but a trifling 
and almost nameless consideration. Notwithstanding, these miserable 
creatures prefer travelling four hundred miles to hire for such dihiinutive 
wages, rather than to remain in their own country and work for less. 
They know of no better way to £^et a living, and are, therefore, happy in 
their ignorance, and contentedly orag out a wretched existence as best they 
may. 

After a period of service they generally return home laden with the pal- 
try proceeas of their toil, and, yielding to the impulses of custom, a single 
fandango is sufficient to leave them penniless like the squalid crowd with 
whom Siey mingle. 

A week's stay at the Fort restored me to health and soundness from the 
debilitating efi»cts of the fever and ague, without a resort to medicioe. 
This disease (the first and only attack of which I ever experienced) had 
made fearful inroads upon my strength during the short interval of its con- 
tinuance, and renderea me unfit for travelling ; — ^but, a change of climate 
and the inhalation of the pure mountain air efiected a permanent and speedy 
cure, in a much less time than I had reason to expect. 

Fort Lancaster occupies a pleasant site upon the south bank of tfa^ Platte 
river, about nine hundred miles from its mouth, and seven hundred and 
twen^^ from Independence, in lat. 40«> 12' 26" north, long. 105° 63' 11" 
west from Greenwich. The distance from this point to the dividing ridge 
of the Rocky Mountains is about thirty-five miles, and from Taos, in New 
Mexico, between tlyee and four hundred miles. 

Long's Peak with its eternal snow appears in distinct view to the west- 
ward, and imparts to the sunset scenery a beauty and griuideur rarely wit- 
nessed in any country. This peak is one of the hig&st of the mountain 
range, being upwards of 13,500 feet above the levd of the Gulf of Mexiov 



SKETCH OF THE ARAPAHOS. 21S 

and iflsoes from its eastern side the waters of the Atlantic, and from iti 
western the tributaries of the Pacific. 

Between the mountains and the F^rt, the prairie is generally level, thongfa 
slightly undulating in places ; — ^it is possessed of a tolerable soil, composed 
of clay and gravel, ever and anon spreading before the traveller rich val 
leys, decked with sweet flowers and fusty herbage. 

The country eastward is rolling, sandy, and sterile ; and, with few ex 
oegdons, presents little to attract the eye or please the &ncy. 

The Platte bottoms, above and below, are quite heavily timbered and af 
fenl an abundance of grass of various kinds. The soil is of a black, deep 
loam, very rich and well adapted to cultivation. 

The business transacted at this post is chiefly with the Chyennes, but 
the Arapahos, Mexicans, and Soux also come in for a laree share, and 
contribute to render it one of the most profitable trading establishments in 
the country. 

Sept. 10th, Arrangements being completed for resuming my journey* 
I left Fort Lancaster in company with four others, intending to proceed aS' 
&r as Taos in New Mexico. We were all mounted upon stout horses, and 
provided with two pack-mules for the conveyance of baggage and pruvi- 
sioDs. 

Following the trail leading from the Platte to the Arkansas, or Rio iVo- 
ffestet we continued our way some thir^-five miles, and halted with a camp 
of free traders' and hunters, on Cherry creek. 

This stream is an aflluent of the Platte, from the southeast, heading in a 
broad ridge of pine hills and rocks, known as the ^ Divide." It pursues its 
course for nearly sixty miles, through a broad valley of rich soil, tolerably 
well timbered, and shut in for the most part by high plats of table land, — 
at intervals thickly studded with lateral pines, cedars, oaks, and shrubs of 
various kinds, — gradually expanding its banks as it proceeds, and exchang- 
ing a bed of rock and pebbles for one of quicksand and gravel, till it finally 
attains a width of nearlv two hundred yards, and in places is almost lost in 
the sand. The stream derives its name from the abundance of cherry found 
upon it. 

The country passed over from the Fort to this place, is ^nerally sandy, 
but yields quite a generous growth of grass. We passed, in our course, 
the dry beds of two transient creeks, one eight, and the other fifteen miles 
from the Fort. 

Our route bore nearly due south for twenty miles, following the Platte 
bottom to the mouth of Cherry creek, thence southeast, continuing up Uie 
valley of the latter. The Platte presented heavy groves of timber upon both 
banks, as did also its islands, while its bottoms appeared fertile. 

The mountains, some fifteen miles to our right, towering aloft with their 
snow-capped summits and dark frowning sides, looked Me vast piles of 
clouds, big with storm and heaped upon the lap of earth ; while the vapor- 
scuds that flitted around them, seemed as the ministers of pent up wrath, in 
readiness to pour forth their torrents and deiug:e the surrounding plains, or 
let loose the nerce tornado and strew its path with desolation. 

Three or four miles before reaching our present camp, we passed a vil* 
lage of the Arapahos on its way to the mountains, in. pursuit of gams 



214 FREE TRADERS. 

With this the reader is introduced to that nation for the first time, which 
affords me occasion to speak of them more particularly. 

The Arapahos are a tribe of prairie Indians, inhabiting the country bor- 
dering upon the South Fork of l^e Platte and Arkansas rivers. 

Their territory embraces an extent of about forty-five thousand square 
miles, a portion of whicli is well watered and interspersed with numerous 
fertile spots. Timber is rarely found, except in the creek bottoms and 
among tne mountains. A large section of it, however, is dry, sandy, and 
sterile, and almost entirely timberless and destitute of water. The game 
of these regions includes all the varieties common to the mountains, which 
are quite abundant. The territory also possesses larc^e mineral resources, 
and includes among its btores of hidden wealth, gold, silver, copper, lead, 
iron, coal, soda, nitre, salt, and sulpher, with vast beds of gypsum. 

This nation boasts some five hundred and twenty-live lodges, numbeikig 
not far from four thousand souls. In appearance, as well as manners and 
customs, they assimilate the Sioux and Chyennes. Their insignia of na- 
tionality is a tattooed breast, by which they are distinguished fro«n neigh- 
boring tribes. They s.SbTd to the observer the rare instance of increasing 
numbers in an Indian population. 

The Arapahos since their first treaty with the whites, some fifteen years 
ago, have maintained terms of the strictest friendship on their part. They 
have never been known to kill or even injure a white man in the interval, 
and rarely to steal from him any article of value. They seem to take pleas- 
ure in the bestowment of kindness and hospitality upon such whenever in 
their power, but commonly in expectation of rewara, and are exceedingly 
annoying as beggars. 

These Indians, though brave, are less warlike than contiguous tribes, — 
being at variance osly with the Utahs and Pawnees, whose countries are 
severally invaded as occasion serves, and often with success. 

They possess considerable taste for trafficing, and regularly meet the 
Sioux, Chyennes, Cumanches, and Kuyawas for that purpose, and many 
of them know how to drive as good a bargain as the most expert Yankee. 

Notwithstanding the many good qualities possessed by them, they are in- 
ferior to their neighbors in morality. The Sioux and Chyennes are far 
more chaste, and never indulge in the low practices common with the Arap- 
ahos. Virtue with the former is guarded by the strictest vigilance and 
jedousy, while with the latter it is made the minister of lust and is prosti- 
tuted for a paltry bribe. 

As yet no effort has been made for their improvement, though I regard them 
as more susceptible of civilization than any other of the prairie tribes. They 
appear to be great admirers of the manners, customs, arts, and mode of liv- 
ing prevalent among the whites, and only lack the requisite instruction to 
become their successful imitators. » 

The camp at which we are at present located consists of four lodges,-— 
three of whites, and one of Black^pot Indians. 

Each of the whites has his squaw wife, and the usual accompaniment of 
ruddy faced children. In regard to the latter, I must say they were more 
beautiful, interesting, and intelligent than the same number of fuU-bloods,— 
either of whites or Indians. 




A BLACK>OOT Chisv.— fV 91^ 



BEAIUK. 817 

^^■^Vinnnn Tr i n ii nn ii ru ii r i j » nrr ii -|.r i .n i« " ii iwiii nr i n> « n i n i - i r « - i r i nr ii - i n i i - i - i - i r .n- i - i —————— ——^-—^^—^— ■- ■ ■ i^.^.^.....— .»^ _ 

These men wete liyinff after the fiishion of their nenF-fomid lelatiyeB, and 
seemed to enjoy themsehres as well as circimiBtances would admit They 
had a number of horses, with the requisite supply of arms and ammunitioiv— 
the sure sources of wealth and comfort in a country abounding with game. 

The Indian &mily were relatives by marriage, and were one of some fii^ 
teen lodges of Blackfeet among the Aiapahos, who forsook their own nSf 
tion, on account of its uncompromising hostili^ to the whites. Quite a 
number oi these Indians have also joined the Sioux and Nespercee, for a 
like reason. \ 

We were entertained very kindly by our new Mends who spared no eflbrt ^ 
to render our stay agreeable. Among tiie delicacies set bsfore us, was 
one deserving of notice^ — it consisted of the firuit of prickly pears (cadi) 
boiled in water for some ten or twelve hours till it became perfectly soft, 
whem it was compressed through a thin cloth into the fluid in which it had 
been boiled. This forms a delicious variety in mountain iare, and one highfy 
stimulating and nutritious. 

The immense quantities of cacti fruit found near the mountains, aft the . 
proper season, render the above an entertainment not uncommon. 

Sept. IZth. Again under way ; after a ride of fifteen miles, night finds us 
at Blackfoot-camp, snugly chambered in a spacious cave, to avoid the disi^ 
greeable efifects of a snow*8torm that comes upon the reluctant prairie with 
all the withering keenness of winter. 

The cave afibrding us shelter is formed in an abrupt embankment of lime- 
stone, that marks the eastern limits of a beautiful valley through which a 
flmall aflSiuent of Cherry creek traces its way. The floor is of dry gravel 
and rock, about fifty feet long by fifteen wide, while upon one side a crystal 
^HTing presents its tempting draughts. Thus chambered, a small fire soon 
rendered us comfortable and happy, notwithstanding the dreary weadier 
without 

Our course during the day bore southward, and led from the valley of 
Cherry creek to an interesting plateau, furrowed at intervals by deep caS- 
ons, enclosing broad bottoms of rich alluvion, and ridged upon either hand 
by high hills of pine and ledges of naked rock. 

The streams are generally timberless^ — ^the soil of the highlands is of a 
ted, clayey mould, and quite fertile. Instead of the aridity incident to the 
neighboring prairies, it is usually humid. 

The country hereabouts, for an extent of upwards one thousand square 
miles, is much subject to storms of rain, hail, snow, and wind, — and it is 
rarely a person can pass through it without being caught by a storm of 
some kind. I can account for this in no other way than by supposing it 
has some connection with the vast quantities of minerals lying embedded in 
its Mils and valleys. 

Sept. I4th. Morning was ushered in with a pleasant sunshine, that soon 
caused the snow of the past night to yield beneath its melting influences. 

When on the point of raising camp, an old grizzly bear made her appear- 
ance with three cubs. An effort to approach her proved futile, — she, hav« 
ine snuflled the closeness of danger with the breeze, made a hasty retreat 
^ftk her ofbpmg. 

19 



SIB NIGHT VISITORS. 

I allade to the above incident for this reason, that it is generally Bnppoaed 
the bear produces but two at a birth. 

Continuing our joumeytill late at night, we reached an affluent of Foift> 
Urine qui Bouity called Daugherty's creek, after travelling a distance of 
some tnirty miles. Here we remained for three or four days, to procure a 
farther supply of provisions. 

The route from Blackfoot-camp, for the most part, led over a roogfa 
country, interspersed with high piny ridges and beautiful valleys, suataii^ 
inffa luxuriant growth of vegetation, which is known as the Divide. 

This romantic region gives rise to several large tributaries both of the 
Platte and Arkansas, and furnishes the main branches of the Kansas. Ite 
geological classifications consist of sandstone, limestone, granite, and cre- 
taceous rock. Large quantities of silex are also found, together with 
many interesting specimens of petrifaction that principally consist of pine 
wood ; these, in many cases, exnibit the tree in its perfect shape, witn all 
the grains and pores that marked its growth. 

A ride of three hours took us past the heads of Bijou and Kuyawa, 
whose clear and swift currents, confined to narrow beds, here presented a 
striking contrast to those remarked at their confluence with the Platte. 

Continuing on a few miles, we reached Black Squirrel creek, an affluent 
of the Arkansas ; and from thence, after a brisk trot for some fourteen 
miles over a nearly level prairie, we came to our present camp. 

Our place of stay was in sweet little valley enclosed by piny ridges. 
The entrance leading to it is through a defile of hills from whose rugged 
sides protrude vast piles of rock, that afford a pass of only fifty or a hun- 
dred yards in width. An abundance of grass greets the eye, arrayed in 
the loveliness of summer's verdancy, and blooming wild-flowers nod to the 
breeze as enchantingly as when the fostering hand of spring first awoka 
them to hfe and to beauty. 

The creek derives its name from Daugherty, a trader who was murder- 
ed upon it several years since. At the time he "was on his way to the Ar- 
kansas with a quantity of goods, accompanied by a Mexican. The latter, 
anxious to procure a few yards of calico that constituted a part of the 
freight, shot him in cold blood, and hastened to Taos with his ill-gotten 
gains, where he unblushingly boasted of his inhuman achievement. 

My excursions among the hills brought before me many interesting 
geological specimens, mostly such as characterize the Divide. I notioea 
two or three extensive beds of ston^ coal in the vicinity of the creek, with 
an abundance of nitre and other mineral salts. 

Having killed three fine cows during the five days we remained at tins 
place, the scent of fresh meat attracted an old bear and her cub, which, in 
the expectation of a choice repast, were induced to pay us a night visit 

We were quietly reposing at the time, nor dreamed of the ungainly 
monsters within camp, till their harsh growls grated upon our ears and 
raised us each to a speedy consciousness. Instantly every rifle was 
clenched and levelled at the unwelcome intruders, and two discharges 
bespoke their warm reception. The besjs, not &ncying this new tesi 
«f niendsliip, quicklv withdrew and permitted us to resume our slumberSL 

Fitzpatrick and Van Dusen, two old mountaineers, passed our 



SODA SPRING. 219 

eampmenty in the interim, on their way to the States. Having devoted a 
niunoer of years to the business of trapping, few possess a more intimate 
Imowledge of this country than they. The former of these gentlemen was 
on hie return from Oregon with dispatches for the U. S. Government, and 
had acted as pilot for a party of emigrants to that territory during the pre- 
vious summer. After conducting his charge to their place of destination, 
he and his companion had travelled thus far alone,''' — a distance of more 
than one thousand mUes. 

Sept. 19ih. Leaving Daugherty's creek we resumed our course, and 
reached the Arkansas 3ie next day, about noon. Here we encamped in a 
small grove of cottonwood upon the right bank, a few miles above the 
mouth of Fontaine qui Bouit 

In gaining this point we travelled some forty-five miles, mostly over a 
sandy prairie, sJi^htly undulating to the leftward, but, to the right, descri- 
bing the waves of a tempest-tossed ocean. 

Its general character is sterility ; the grass gowinff thinly and being of a 
coarse kind, with the exception of that of the creek oottoms, which affords 
several varieties of a lusty size, mingled with occasional spreads of prtle — 
a choice article for the subsistence of horses and mules. 

In passing along, I observed a new species of the cacti family, that grew 
in a shurb-like form to a height of five or six feet Its stalk was round 
and fully an inch in diameter. 

This made the fourth variety of cactus noticed during the past few days. 
Of these, two resemble the common " prickly pear " in their appearance. 
Another species, however, was egg-shaped, bearing a fruit much like the 
cranberry in color and form. At the proper season, it also produces a beau- 
tiful red flower, that emits a most a^rreeable perfume, in some measure 
atoning for its dreaded intrusion upon tJicpath of the wayfarer. 

JFonfmne qtd Bouit, or the Boiling Fountain, is the name bestowe?! upon 
a considerable stream that heads under Pike's Peak, in lat. 38^ 62' 10" 
north, long. 105° 22' 46" west from Greenwich, and pursues a southerly 
course till it unites with the Arkansas. 

This name is derived from two singular springs, situated within a few 
3rards of each otlier at the creek's heaii, both of which emit water in the 
lorm of vapor, accompanied with a hissin? noise— the one strongly impreg- 
natGKd with sulphur and the other with soda.f 

^Before reaching the States, however, he was robbed of everything in his posses- 
rion by a war-party of Pawnees, whom he had impradently su^ied to obtain the 
advantage. He would, doubtless, have been killed had it not been for the determined 
oonrage of Van Dusen. lltie latter, seizing his rifle, levelled it at the foremost and 
tiins deterred a further advance; then, by an adroit movement, breaking from 
thein, set pursuit at defiance through his fleetness of foot. 

The Pawnees, now well aware that further outrages would be made known and 
become a subject of investigation by tlie U. S. Government, forbore their designs, 
and returned to Fitzpatrick his gun and one mule, witli which he accomplished the 
remainder o{ his journey alone. Van Dusen, having succeeded in reaching Bent's 
Fort on the Arkansas, reported his companion as killed by them. 

tCapt Fremont, who visited Fontaine qui Bouit in the summer of '43, has furnish- 
•d the ibllowinj^ analysis of an incrustalion with which the water of this spring hat 



220 A LOVELY VALLEY. 

The soda water is fully as good as any manufactared for especial tne^ 
and sfHirkles and foams with equal eflervescence. This spring, though at 
present cool, is said to have heen formerly quite the reverse. Some twen- 
ty years since, the heat was sufficient to cook flesh in an half hour's tims^ 
if submerged in its waters. ' 

The Arapahoe regard this phenomenon with awe, and venerate it as the 
manifestation of the immediate presence of the Great Spirit. They call it 
the Medicine Fountain, and seldom neglect to bestow their gifts up(Hi it 
whenever an opportunity is presented. 

These offerings generally consist of robes, blankets, arrows, bows, 
knives, beads, moccasins, &c., which they either throw into the water or 
hang upon the surrounding trees. Sometimes a whole village will visit 
the place for the purpose of paying their united regard to this sacred 
fountain. 

The secenenr of the vicinity is truly ma^ficent A valley several 
yards in width heads at the springs, overlookmg which from the west in 
almost perpendicular ascent tower the lofby summits of Pike's Peak, piercing 
the clouds and revelling in eternal snow, at an altitude of 12,500 feet 
above the level of the sea. 

This valley opens eastward, and is walled in upon the right and left, at 
the mountains' base, by a stretch of high table land, surmounted by oaks 
and stately pines, with now and then an interval displa^ng a luxuriant 
coating of grass. The soil is a reddish loam, and very rich. The trees 
which skirt the creek as it traces its way from the fountain are generally 
free from under-brush, and show almost as much regularity of pusition as 
if planted by the hand of art. A lusty growth of vegetation is sustained 
among them to their very trunks, which is garnished by wild flowers, that, 
during the summer months, invest the whole scene with an enchantment 
peculiar to itself. 

The climate too is far milder in this than in adjoining regions, even of 
a more southern latitude. 'Tis here ^* summer first unfolds her robes, and 
here the longest tarries." The grass, continuing green the entire winter, 
here first feels the genial touch of spring. Snow seldom remains upon the 
ground to exceed a single day, even in the severest weather, while the 
neighboring hills and prairies present their white mantlings for weeks in 
succession. 

As the creek emerges from the mountains, it increases in size by the ac- 
cession of several tributaries, and the valley also expands to a width of 

covered a piece of wood ; and, though probably not a &ir test, it will afifinnl tbt 

reader some idea of its mineral properties : 

Carbonate of lime • - - • • -SS, 35 

Carbonate of magnesia • • - • • . 1, SI 

Sulphate of lime 
Chloride of calcium 
Chloride of magnesia 

SiUca - . - - . . . 1, 50 

Ve^table matter • ... . . 90 

HoiBture and lost ...... 4, 61 

100,00 



VICINITY OP THE A^IKANSAS. 221 

three or four miles, retaining for a considerable distance the distinguishing 
traits before described. 

The vicinity aflbrds an abundance of came, among which are deer, 
flheep, bear, antelope, elk, and buflyo, togemer with turkeys, geese, ducks, 
grouse, mountain-fowls, and rabbits. 

Aflbrding, as it does, such magnificent and delightful scenery ; such 
rich stores for the supply of human wants, both to please the taste and en- 
rapture the heart ; so heaven-like in its appearance and character, it is no 
wonder the untaught savage reveres it as the place wherein the Good 
Spirit delights to dwell, and hastens with his free-will offerings to tlie 
strange fountain, in the full belief that its bubbling waters are tfie mpre 
imm^iate impersonation of Him whom he adores. 

But, there are other scenes adjoining this, that demand a passing notice. 
A few miles above Fontaine qui Bouit, and running parallel with Sie east- 
em base of the mountain range, several hundred yards removed from 
it, a wall of coarse, red granite (quite friable and constantly abrading) 
towers to a varied height of from fifty to three hundred feet 

This wall is formea of immense strata, planted vertically and not ex- 
ceeding eight feet in thickness, with frequent openings — so arranged as to 
descrite a complete line. 

The soil in which they appear is of a reddish loam, almost entirely des- 
titute of other rock, even to their very base. 

This mural tier is isolated, and occupies its prairie site in silent majesty, 
as if to guard the approaches to the stupendous monuments of nature's 
handiwork that form the back-ground, disclosing itself to the beholder for 
a distance of more than thirty miles. 



CHAPTER XXI. 



Vicinity of the Arkansas.— Settlement— The Pueblo.— Rio San Carlos, its valleys 
and scenery. — Shooting by moonlight.— Taos.— Review of the country travelled 
QYer. — TtLoa ; its vicinity, scenery, and mines. — Ranches and Rancheros. — Mexi- 
can houses ; their domestic economy, and filth. — ^Abject poverty and deplorable 
condition of the lower classes of Mexicans, with a general review of their char- 
acter, and some of the causes contributing to their present degradation.— The Pue- 
blo Indiana and their strange notions. — Ancient temple. — Cliaracter of the Pueblos 
—Journey to the Uintah river, and observations by the way.— Taos Utahf«, Pa- 
utahs, Uintah and Lake Utahs.— The Diggers ; misery of their situation, strange 
mode of living, vnth a sketch of their character.— The Navijos ; their civilization, 
hostility to Spaniards, ludicrous barbarity, bravery, &c., with a sketch of their 
country, and why they are less favorable to the whites than formerly. 

The Arkansas at this point is a clear and beautiful stream, about one 
hundred and fifty yards wide. It flows over a bed of rock and pebblef, 
with a rapid current, averaging two feet in depth. Its southern bank |g 
steep and inducts to a high sandy prairie, which present a somewhat ster* 

19* 



222 THE BIO SAN GABLOS. 

ile and denuded appearance. The northern nhore affords a wide bottom of 
black loam, generally fertile, and timbered with occasional groves of cot- 
tonwood. &yond this a high undulating prairie, presenting now and then 
a cluster of pines and cedars, leads off to tne neighboring mountains. 

The river above, for a distance of some forty miles, possesses many 
beautiful vallevs, well timbered, and a rich soO, until the traveller arrives 
at the place where it makes its entree from the lofty mountain chain in 
which it heads. 

The land indicates a fitneas for agricultural purposes, and holds out 
Btrong inducements to emigrants. A small settlement of whites and 
hajf- breeds, numbering fifteen or twenty femilies, has already been com- 
menced about thirty miles above the mouth of Fontaine qui Bouit under 
quite favorable anspicies. The only fean entertained for its success, are 
on account of the Indians. 

Many other localities in this vicinity are equally inviting were it not for 
the character and habits of the surrounding natives. 

At the delta, formed by the junction of Fontaine qui Bouit witli the 
Arkansas, a trading fort, called the Pueblo, was built during the summer 
of 1842. This pMt is owned by a company of independent traders, on 
the common property system; and, from its situation, can command a 
profitable trade with both Mexicans and Indians. Its occupants number 
ten or twelve Americans, most of whom are married to Mexican women, 
while everything about the establishment wears the aspect of neatness 
and comfort 

Sefft, 22d. Crossing the Arkansas, I for the first time set foot upon 
Mexican soil. 

Taking the Taos trail, we continued our way for ten or twelve miles 
and came to the Rio San Carlos. Here the abundance of deer and tui^ 
keys was too great a temptation to be resisted, and we remained seveial 
days to bestow upon them that attention our appetites demanded. 

The country adjacent is very ronumtic and beautiful. The hills, en 
dosing the valley of the San Carlos upon both sides, are high and preci- 
pitous, — afibrding numerous groves of pine, pinion,* and cedar. iDter* 
^persed among them are frequent opemngs and prairiUons of rich soil 
and luxuriant vegetation. The valley is narrow, but fertile and well 
timbered. 

Near the head of the river is a broad area, known as Fisher's-hole, bound- 
ed upon all sides by rugged hills and mountains, inaccessible except by 
a circuitous pass leading into it from the south. The stream forces its 
egress through a ledge of dark-colored rock, several hundred feet in alti- 
tude, leaving vertical wjdls upon each side for a long distance, that fre- 
quently o^eriiang the gurgling waters sweeping at their base. 

* This tree ii a epecies of pine, ^uite oommon in New Mexico, California, aod 
ione parts of the mountains. It yields a kind of nut similar to that of the beech* 
which is esteeiEMd as an article of food. Wild toilceys delight to frequent groves of 
'*^* tiiaber, sod wiU thrive in an extraordinary manner upon pinion-nuts. 



TAOS AND ITS VICINnY. 22$ 

This valley contains more tha,n a thousand acres of choice land* well 
supplied with timber from the heavy pine forests surrounding it. 

The prevailing rock is granite, sandstone, limestone, and lias, with 
occasional conglomerates of various kinds. I noticed strong indications 
of copper and other minerals ; and the general appearance of the coun- 
try led me to conclude it to be one possessed of vast stores of hidden 
wealth. 

While here, we were quite successful in replenishing our stock of 
provisions. 

My experiments in turkey-hunting made me a proficient shot by moon- 
light, a feat which adds materially to the sport. This is done by manosu- 
vring so as to have the turkey in a direct line between the marksman 
and the moon, causing its shadow to fall upon his face, — ^then, raising his 
rijie to a level from the ground upwards, the instant the sight becomes 
darkened he fires, and, if his piece be true, seldom fails to make a centre 
shot 

The most feasible mode of hunting turkeys is to watch their roosting 
places at night ; and, after the moon attains the required position, they 
may be killed by dozens in the above manner. They rarely lea^e their 
roosts on account of the firing ; but remain, half stupified with affright, 
while they are picked off one after another by the practised hunter. 

Sept, 25tJu Again resuming our journey, we reached Taos on the 1st 
of October. 

Our stay at this place was prolonged for several days, during which 
time we took boarding with a Mexican lady, the widow of an American 
trader. 

The country travelled over en route, from the San Carlos to Taos is 
very rough and jmountainous, but variegated by many fertile valleys 
skirting the numerous tributaries of the /G'kansas and del Norte. 

The trail crosses several of the latter streams, for the most part bear* 
ing an easterly course ; among which are the Cornua Virda, Huaquetore, 
Tim pa, Apache, and Pischepa. 

These creeks frequently pass through deep cafions of sandstone and 
limestone for a distance of several miles together, — disclosing upon all 
sides a wild and romantic scenery. The great fault with the valleys is 
a lack of timber ; the hills, however, are generally supplied with pine* 
pinion, and cedar, which, in a measure, atones for the above deficiency. 

On leaving the Pischepa, a reach of little more than one jomada (day's 
travel) leads over the mountain range, separating the waters of the Ar- 
kansas and del Norte, at a point bearing a short distance to the left of 
two famous landmarks, called the Spanish Peaks. 

Here the traveller is at once ushered into the valley of Taos ; and* 
eontinuinff on, in a brief interval finds himself surrounded by a clan ctf 
half-naked Mexicans. 

Taos proper embraces several fertile lateral valleys bordering upon 
&e del Norte, and three small affluents from the east and is 8uppose4 
to contain a population of some ten thousand, includir/g Indians, Moora^ 
HaJf.breeds, Mulattoes, and Spaniards. It is divided into several pre» 



224 MEXICAN HOUSES. 

■M^»^^»^»rf^/^^^^^»^^^^^>^'^^^^^^<^^|^^^>^'^* %,^^»^.^'^^W^-^-rV<^ ^i*».»*V>%rf»**Vi^'^'-*.^V-i*w^ ^^V*-i->»w^rf-.^^^ 

cinUi, or neighborhoods, within short distances of each other, amon^ 
which Arroyo Hondo is the principal. 

This section of country is very romantic, and affords many scenes to 
excite the admiration of beholJers. It is shut in by lofly mountains, 
upon three sides, that tower to an altitude of several tnousand feet, now 
Hfesenting their pine-clad summits among the clouds, now with denu- 
ded crests defying the tempest ; and then peering skyward to hold con- . 
verse with the scathing blasts of unending winter. 

The mountains are rich in minerals of various kinds. Gold is found in 
considerable quantities in their vicinity, and would doubtless yield a large 
profit to diggers, were they possessed of the requisite enterprise and 
capital. At present these valuable mines are almost entirely neglected, 
—the common people being too ignorant and poor to wurk tliem, and 
the rich too indolent and fond of ease. 

The Mexicans possess large ranchos of sheep, horses, mules, and cat- 
tle among the mountains, which are kept there the entire year, by a 
degraded set cf beings, following no business but that of herdsmen, 
or rancheros. 

This cl iss of people have no loftier aspirations tlian to throw the 
lasso with dexterity, and break wild mules and horses. 

They have scarcely an idea of any other place than the little circle in 
which they move, nor dream of a more happy state of existence than their 
own. Half-naked and scantily fed, they are contented with the miserable 
pittance doled out to them by the proud lordlings they serve, while their 
wild songs merrily echo through the hills as they pursue their ceaseless 
vocations till death drops his dark curtain o'er the scene. 

There are no people on the continent of America, whether civilized or 
nncivilized, with one or two exceptions, more miserable in condition or des- 
picable in morals than the mon^el race inhabiting New Mexico. In say- 
fg this, I deal in generalities ; but were I to particularize the observation 
ould hold good in a large majority of cases. 

Next to the squalid appearance of its inhabitants, the fir^t thing that 
arrests the attention of the traveller on entering an Mexican settlement, is 
the uninviting mud walls that form the rude novels which constitute its 
dwellings. 

These are one story high and built of adobies, with small windows, (like 
file port-holes of a fortification,) generally without glass. The entrance is 
by an opening in the side, very low, and frequently unprotected by a door. 
The roof is a terrace of sod, reposing upon a layer of small logs, afibrding 
but poor protection from the weather. 

The interior presents an aspect quite as forbidding ; — ^the floors are sim- 
ply the naked ground, — chairs and tables are articles rarely met with. In 
case of an extra room, it is partitioned off by a thin wall of mud, comma- 
nicating with its neighbor through a small window-shaped aperture, and 
serves the double purpose of a chamber and store-house. 

A few rags, tattered blankets, or old robes, furnish beds for its inmate«» 
who, at night&U, stow themselves away promiscuously upon the ground 
or in narrow bins, and snooze their rounds despite the swarms of noxious 
murmin that infest them, (companions from which they are seldom firee, 



ABJECT CONDITION OF MEXICANS . 225 



kr^'^^^^^>'^^^^^^^^^^^^»^k^k^^N^t^«^k^«^l^k^k^t^k^MM^^kMAAA^«^k^l^lAAMA#M*M^W 



irhetber sleeping or waking, — and afford them, perhaps, in greater number 
and variety of species than any other known people.) 

Bat, before the picture is complete, we must be indulged in a brief sketch 
of their kitchen economy. 

Knives, forks, spoons, and plates, seldom grace the board of a Mexicao 
in common circumstances. A single pot of earth, a knife, two or three 
trenchers, and as many water-gourds, constitute almost the entire kitches 
furniture of the lower classes; — a kind of gruel (loUe) made by stirring a 
few handfuls of flour into boiling water or milk, is their principal subsis-. 
tence. 

Meat finds no place upon their larder,— it being an article too costly for 
ordinary food, as the sheep and cattle of the country are owned by the 
wealthy, and by their exorbitant demands placed beyond the means of the 
commoner. Wood too, being two rials (25 cents) per mule-load, is seldom 
used in the large towns for ottier than culinary purposes. 

During the winter montiis, these filthy wretciies are seen, day after day, 
basking at the sunny side of their huts, and bestowing upon each other 
certain friendly offices connected with the head, wherein the swarming 
populace of the pericranium are had in alternate requisition. 

The entire business of the country is in the Imnds of the rich, upon 
whom the laboring classes are mainly dependant for support ; and, as a natu- 
ral consequence, the rich know no end lo their treasures, nor the poor to 
their poverty. 

The common laborer obtains only from four to six dollars per month, out 
of which he must feed and clothe himself. In case lie runs in debt beyond 
his means, he is necessitated by law to serve for the required amount, at 
two doUars per month ; — thus, once in debt, it is almost impossible ever to 
extricate himself. 

But a thing adding still further to his load of misfortunes is the hi^n 
price set upon the necessaries and comforts of life. This ranges as tol- 
lows : coffee, from 37^ to 50 cts. per lb. ; sugar, from 18 to 25 cts. per 
da; calico, from 25 cts. to $1 per yd.; domestic, 25 to 50 cts. ; broadcloths, 
irom $10 to $20, and every thing else in proportion. 

Under such circumstances, it is scarcely marvellous that we find the 
Mexican in his present low state of degradation. 

Having &intly depicted the real condition of a large majority of the de- 
generate inhabitants of New Mexico, it will be expected of me to say some- 
thing of their intelligence and moraUty ; and here a still more revolting 
task awaits my effoH, 

Intelligence is confined almost exclusively to the higher classes, and the 
poor " paUivro^' comes in for a very diminutive share. 

Education is entirely controlled by the priests, wn(/ make use of their 
utmost endeavors to entangle the minds of tlieir pupils in the meshes of 
superstition and bigotry. The result of this may be plainly stated in a few 
words :. • 

Superstition and bigotry are universal, — all, both old and ^oung, being 
tied down to the disgusting formalities of a religion that manifests itself in 
little else than senseless parade and unmeaning ceremony, — while a large 
majority cau neither read nor write. 



226 WHY SO DEGRADED. 

These conservators of intelligence and morals are often as sadl^ deficient 
in either as those they assume to teach. Gambling, swearing, driniung, 
Sabbath -breaking, and sundry other vices, are the too frequent concomitants 
of their practice ; — under such instructors, who can fail to foresee the 
attendant train of evils ? The abject condition of the people fitvors the inw 
press of unsound instruction and deteriorating example, reducing public 
morals to a very low ebb. 

Property and life are alike unsafe, and a large proportion of the whole com* 
munity are little other than thieves and robbers. Profanity is their common 
language. In their honesty, integrity, and good faith, as a general thing, 
no reliance should be placed. They are at all times ready to betray their 
trust whenever a sufficient inducement is presented. 

With the present of a few dollars, witnesses may be readily obtained to 
swear to anything; and a like bonus placed in the hands of the AJcaldi will 
generally secure the required judgment, however much at variance with the 
true merits of the cause. 

Thus, justice becomes a mere mockery, and crime stalks forth at noon- 
day, unawed by fear of punishment, and unrebuked by public opinion and 
practice. 

But fear, in most cases, exercises a far more controlling influence over 
them than either gratitude or favor. They may be ranked with the few 
exceptions in the family of man who cannot endure good treatment To 
manage them successfully, they must needs be held in continual restraint, 
and kept in their place by force, if necessary,— else they will become 
haughty and insolent. • 

As servants, they are excellent, when properly trained, but are worse than 
useless if left to themselves. 

In regard to the Mexican women, it would be unfair to include them in 
thepreceding summary. 

The ladies present a striking^ contrast to their countryman in general 
character, other than morals. They are kind and aflectionate in the.r dis- 
position, mild and aflable in their deportment, and ever ready to administer 
to the necessities of others. But, on the score of virtue and common 
chastity, they are sadly deficient; while ignorance and superstition are 
equally predominant. 

One of the prime causes in producing this deplorable state of things may 
be a trlbuted to that government policy which confines the circulating me- 
dium of the country within too narrow limits, and thus throws the entire 
business of the country into the hands of the capitalist. 

A policy like this must ever give to the rich the moneyed power, while it 
drains from the pockets of the poor man and places him at the mercy of 
haughty lordlings, who, taking advantage of his necessity, grant him but 
the scanty pittance for his services they in tender compassion see fit to 
bestow. 

The higher classes have thus attained the supreme control, and the com- 
moners must continue to cringe and bow to their will. In this manner the 
latter have, by degrees, lost all ambition and self-respect, — and, in degradar 
tion, are only equalled by their efiTeminacy. 



THE PUEBLO INDIANS. M7 

Possessed of little moTal restrant, and interested in nothing but the de- 
mands of present want, they abandon themselves to vice, and prey upon 
one another and those around them. 

Acting upon the principle, that " necessity knows no law,'* they know no 
law for necessity, and help tliemselves without compunction to whatever 
chance throws in their way. 

To this we may also look for a reason why the entire country is so in- 
fested with banded robbers, that scour it continually in quest of plunder. 
Mankind are naturally vicious ; and, when necessity drives them lo wrong 
for the procurement of a bare subsistence, they are not slow to become 
adepts in the practice of evil. 

A few miles to the southeast of Taos, is a large village of Pueblos, at 
civilized Indians. These are far superior to their neighbors in circum- 
stances, morals, civil regulations, character, and all the oUier distinguishing 
traits of civilization. 

This race are of the genuine Mexican stock, and retain many of their 
tncient customs, though nominally Catholic in their religion. 

Cherishing a deep-rooted animosity towards their conquerors, they only 
await a favorable opportunity to re-assert their liberty. 

They live in houses built of stone and earth, and cultivate the ground for 
a subsistence, — own large herds of cattle, horses, and sheep, — ^while their 
women spin and weave, with no small pretentions to skill. 

Among their peculiarities is the belief, still entertained by many of them, 
that Montezuma, their former emperor, will yet return from the Spirit Land, 
and, placing himself at the head of his people, enable them to overcome 
the despoilers of his ancient dominions. 

In this strange faith a fire was kept burning without intermission, from 
the death of Montezuma till within ten years past, (a period of nearly three 
centuries,) as a beacon-light to mark the place for his appearing. 

This fire was sustained by an ancient order of priests ministering at a 
temple of unknown age, the ruins of which, it is said, are yet to be seen 
two miles back from St. Miguel, in a very good state of preservation. By 
verbal descriptions received from those who have visited them, I am led to 
infer that they afibrd many curious and interesting evidences of Mexican 
grandeur and tend to shed much light upon their former history and reli- 
gion. 

The sculpture is said to represent men and animals of difierent kinds, 
in many strange varieties of shape and posture ; among them are beasts, 
birds, and reptiles, some of which are of unknown species. 

The workmanship is rather rude and without much regard to uniformity 
or proportion of parts, yet possessing a wild beauty and harmony peculiar 
to itself alone, that at once strikes Uie beholder with feelings of pleasing 
wonder. 

I had cherished the intention of visiting personally these strange relics 
of the past, but was induced to defer it for a more convenient oppoi tunitj 
than the present ; and. finally, from my subsequent connection with the 
Texans, f abandoned it altogether. 

The Pueblos number a population of several thousand, and are scattered 
over a considerable extent of territory. They bestow much attention to the 



228 UTAH INDIANS. 

incalcation of good morals in the minds of their children ; and, in portraying 
die pernicious effects of evil-do'ng, frequently admonish thorn in a quaint 
and expressive manner, — " II you do thus and so, you will become as bad 
as a Spaniard!" — ^This seems to constitute, in their opinion, tJie ^^rand cli- 
max of everything vilo and degrading. 

They are represented as humane and brave, and strictly honest and up- 
right in their dealings. Their women too are chaste and virtuous, and in 
this respect present a very favorable contrast to their fairer and more beau- 
tiful sisters of Spanish extraction. 

A small party from a trading establishment on the waters of Green river, 
who had visited Taos for the procarement of a fresh supply of goods, were 
about to return, and I availed myself of the occasion to make one of their 
number. 

On the 7th of October we were under way. Our party consisted of three 
Frenchmen and five Spaniards, under the direction of a man named Roubi- 
dean, formerly from St. Louis, Mo. Some eight pack-mules, laden at the 
rate of two hundred and fifty pounds each, conveyed a quantity of goods i— 
these headed by a guide followed in Indian file, and the remainder of the 
company mounted on horseback brought up the rear. 

Crossing the del Norte, we soon after struck into a large trail bearing 
a westerly course ; following which, on the 13th inst. we crossed the main 
ridge of the Rocky Mountains by a feasible pass at the southern extremity 
of the Sierra de Anabuac range, and found ourselves upon the waters m 
the Pacific. 

Six days subsequent, we reached Roubideau's Fort, at the forks of the 
Uintah, having passed several lar^e streams in our course, as well as the 
two principal branches which unite to form the Colorado. This being the 
point of destination, our journey here came to a temporary close. 

The intermediate country, from Taos to the Uintah, is generally very 
rough and diversified with rich valleys, beautiful plateaux, (lierras temiplo' 
das^ arid prairies, sterile plains, (Uanos,) and denuded mountains. . 

We usually found a sufiiciency of timber upon the streams, as well as 
among the hills, where frequent groves of pinion, cedar, and pine lent an 
agreeable diversity to the scene. Gkune appeared in great abundance 
nearly the whole route, — especially antelope and deer. 

The prevailing rock consisted of several specimens of sandstone, pudding 
stone, and granite, with limestone, (fossiliferous, bituminous and argilla* 
ceous,) and basalt. 

This territory is owned by the Utahs and Navijo Indians. 

The former ol these tribes includes four or five divisions, and inhabits the 
country laying between the Rio del Norte, the Great Salt Lake, and the 
vast desert to the southward of it. These different fractions are known as 
the Taos, Pa-utah, Digger, and Lake Utahs, numbering in all a popula- 
tion of fifteen thousand or more, and exhibiting many peculiarities of 
character and habits distinct from each other. 

The Taos Utahs are a brave and warlike people, located upon the del 
Norte a short distance to the northwest of Taos. These subsist principally 
by hunting, but raise large numbers of horses. They are generally treach- 



THE DIGGERS. 220 

erons and iU-disposed, making alike tioublesome neighbors to the Spaniards 
and dangerous opponents to the whites, whenever an opportunity is pre- 
sented. 

The Pa-utahs and Lake Utahs occupy the territory lying soutli of the 
Snakes, and upon the waters of the Colorado of the west, and south 
of the Great Salt Lake. 

These Indians are less warlike in their nature, and more friendly in their 
disposition, than the Taos Utahs. The persons and property of whites, vis- 
itii^ them for trade or other purposes, are seldom molested ; and all having 
deafings with them, so far as my information extends, unite to give them a 
a eood character. 

They rarely go to war, and eem content to enjoy the blessings of peace, 
and follow the chase within the iiinlts of their own hunting grounds. 

The Diggers, or rather a small portion of them, are a mvision of the 
Utah nation, inhabiting a considerable extent of the barren country directly 
southwest of the Great Salt Lake. They are represented as the roost de- 
plorably situated, perhaps, of the whole family of man, in all that pertains 
to the means of subsistence and the ordinary comforts of life. 

The largest (and. in fact, almost the only) game found withui their terri- 
tory, is a very small species of rabbit, whose skins sewed together consti- 
tute their entire clothing. The soil is too barren for cultivation, sparsely 
timbered, and but illy supplied with water. The consequence of these ac* 
cumulated disadvantages is, that its unfortunate inhabitants are left to 
gather a miserable substitute for food from insects, roots, and the seeds of 
grass and herbs. 

In the summer months they lay In large supplies against the approach of 
winter, — ants furnishing an important item in the strange collection. 

These insects abound in great numbers, and are caught by spreading a 
dampened skin, or fresh-peeled bark, over their hills, which immediately at* 
tracts the inquisitive denizens to its surface ; when filled, the lure is care-* 
fully removed and its adherents shaken into a tight sack, where they are 
confined till dead, — ^they are then thoroughly sun^bried, and laid away for 
use. 

In this manner they are cured by the bushel. The common way of eat- 
ing them is in an uncooked state. These degraded beings live in holes 
dug in the sand near some watercourse, or in rudely constructed lodges of 
absinlhef where they remain in a semi-dormant, inactive state the entire 
winter, — Cleaving their lowly retreats only, now and then, at the urgent calls 
of nature, or to warm their burrows by burning some of the few scanty 
combustibles which chance may aflbrd around them. 

In the spring they creep from their holes, not like bear — ^fattened from a 
long repose — but poor and emaciated, with barely flesh enough to hide their 
bones, and so enervated, from hard fare and frequent abstinence, that they 
can scarcely move. 

So habituated are they to this mode of life from constant inurement,, they 
appear to have no conception of a better one. 

Their ideas and aspirations are as simple as their fare. Give them an 
occasional rabbit, with an abundance of ants, seeds, and roots, and they are 
content to abide in their desert home and burrow like the diminutive animal 
they hunt. ^^ 



830 SKETCH OF THE NAYUOS. 

They entertain great dread of the whites, whose power to do them barm 
tfaey have ]eamed on several occasions by bitter experience. These pain- 
ful lessons have generally been inculcated as follows : impelled by hunger, 
these miserable creatures have sometimes attempted to iiill the n.nimalif of 
trapping parties ; and the trappers, in order to prevent a repetition of such 
occurrences, have been accustomed to shoot down their rude ft«««il«nt^ 
without mercy. 

Since the practice of this summary mode of chastisement has ob* 
tained, those able to run will flee with the utmost consternation on the 
approach of a party of whites, — Cleaving the feeble and infirm in the rear, 
who employ their most piteous supplications and moving entreaties far 
mercy. 

Thes eindians possess a capacity for improvement, whenever circumstan* 
ces favor them. I have seen several, both of men and women, taken from 
among them while young, who, under proper instruction, had made rapid 
progress, and even aisclosed a superiority of intellect, compared with like 
Examples from other nations, — a fact contributing much to prove tliat man* 
kind need only to be placed in like conditions by birth and education 1o 
stand upon the same common level. 

Most of them are represented as inoffensive in their habits and charac- 
ter, — ^never going to war, and rarely molesting any one that passes throngb 
. their country. ^-, 

^ Their arms are clubs, with small bows and arrows made of reedft'^ 
affording but a poor show of resistance to rifles, and a dozen moon- 
\ taiaeers are rendered equal to a full army of such solders. 

The Navijos occupy the country between the del Norte and the 
Sierra Anahuac, siiuated upon the Rio Chaina and Puerco, — from 
thence extending along the Sierra de los Mimbros, ino the province 
of Sonora. 

They are a division of the ancient Mexicans ? hat have never yet fully 
succumbed to Spanish domination, and still mainrain against the con* 
querors of their country an obstinate and uncompromising warfare. 

Like their ancestors, they possess a civilization of their own. Most 
of them live in houses built ot stone, and cultivate the ground, — ^raising 
vegetables and grain for a subsistence. They also efrovv large quauti- ' 
lies of horses, cattle, and sheep — make butter and cheese, and spin and 
weave 

The blankets manufactured by these Indians are supeiior in beauty 
of color, texture, and durability, to tlie ftbri s of their Spanish neigh- 
bors. I have frequently seen them so closely woven as to be impcr^ 
vious to water, and even serve for its transportation. 

The internal regulations of this tribe are represenied, by those more 
intimately acquainted with them, as in strict accordance with the wel- 
fare of the whole community. Lewdness is punished by a public expo- 
Mure of the culprit ; dishonesty is held in check by suitable regulations ; 
industry is encouraged by general consent, and hospitality by common 
praciice. 

In their warfare with the Spaniards, they frequently exhibit a 
strange mixture of humanity and ludicrous barbarity. 



WHY DISTRUSTTTL OF THE WHITES. 231 

They never kill women or children when in their power, but retain 
them as prisoners. The men, however, are invariably dispatched. 

But .n the latter, a comedy nut unfrequentty precedes the tragedy 
which closes the scene. Taking their cue from the passionate fondness 
of the Spaniards for dancing, at times, when any one of these unfortunate 
wretches falls into their power, they form a ring around him, and provi- 
ded wiih switches, compel him to dance until from exhaustion he can 
do so no longer, af\er which he is unfeelingly butchered. His cruel 
tormenters contibue singing, as they force him to dance his own death' 
dirge^ and laugh at his faltering steps. 

As warriors they are brave and daring, and make frequent and bold ex* 
cursions into the Spanish settlements, driving off vast herds of cattle, 
horses, and sheep, and spreading terror and dismay on every side. As 
diplomatists, in imitation of their neighbors, they make and break trea- 
ties whenever interest or inclination prompts them. 

The Navijo country is shut in by high mountains, inaccessible from 
withont, except by limited passes, through narrow defiles well situated 
for defence on the approach of an invading foe. 

Availing themselves of these natural advantages, they have continued 
to maintain their ground against fearful odds, nor have they ever suffered 
the Spaniards to set foot within their territory as permanent conquerors. 

The valleys of the Chama and its tributaries are said to be unrivalled 
In beauty, and possessed of a delightful climate, as well as an exuberant 
fertility of soil. In these valleys winter is comparatively unknown and ve- 
station attains an extraordinary size. The mountains abound with game, 
and are rich in all kinds of minerals. Some of the most valuable gold 
mines in Mexico are supposed to be held by the Navijos. I have convers- 
ed with several Americans who have travelled to considerable extent in 
the territory of these Indians, and all unite to speak of it in most flatter- 
ing terms. 

The Catholics maintain numerous missions among them, and have 
succeeded in propagating their peculiar religious notions to some extent, 
notwithstanding their continued hostilities with the Spaniards. 

The Navijos are generally friendly to the Americans visiting them ; 
but were formerly much more so than at present. This partial estrange- 
ment may be attributed to the depredations of a party of Americans, 
under the lead of one Kirker, who were employed by the governments of 
Santa Fe and Chihuahua, to oppose their incursions. This was done with 
great success — ^the mercenaries despoiling their property, butchering 
their warriors, and bearing off men, women, and children, as captives to 
be BoJd into slavery. 



232 



CHAPTER XXII. 

Uintah tmde.— Snake Indians; tlieir country and character. — Description of Upp» 
California. — The Eaai&Ta Section. — Great Salt Lake and circumjacent country.— 
Desert. — Digger country, and regions south. — Fertility of soil. — Prevailing rock and 
minerals. — ^Abundance of wild fruit, grain, and game. — Valley of the Colorado.—' 
Magnificent scenery. — ^Valleys of the Uintah and other rivers. — Vicinity of the 
Gila. — Face of the country, soil &c. — Sweet spots. — Mildness of cUmate, and its 
healthiness. — The natives. — Sparsity of inhabitants. — No government. — All about 
the Colorado and Gila rivers. — Abundance of fish. — ^Trade in pearl oyster-shells.— 
Practicable routes from the United States. 

In preceding remarks relative to regions coming under present observip 
tion, I have confined myself to generalities, for the reason, that less interest 
is felt by the American pablic, in a minute description of the rivers, moun- 
tains, valleys, etc., so far within the limits of Mexico, than in one connected 
with U. S. Territories ; consequently the reader must rest contented with 
greater conciseness in subsequent pages, until he is aigain introduced to the 
interesting localities of his own country. 

Roubideau's Fort is situated on the right bank of the Uintah, in lat40® 
2T 46" north, long. lOQ** 66* 42" west. The trade of this post is con- 
ducted principally with the trapping parties frequenting the Big Bear, 
Green, Grand, and the Colorado rivers, witli their numerous tributaries, in 
search of fur-bearing game. 

A small business is also carried on with the Snake and Utah Indians, 
living in the neighborhood of this establishment. The common articles of 
dealing are horses, with beaver, otter, deer, sheep, and elk skins, in barter 
for ammunition, fire-arms, knives, tobacco, beads, awls, &c. 

The Utahs and Snakes afibrd some of the largest and best finished sheep 
and deer skins I ever beheld, — a single skin sometimes being amply suffi- 
cient for common sized pantaloons. These skins arc dressed so neatly 
as frequently to attain a snowy whiteness, and possess the softness d 
velvet. 

They may be purchased for the trifiing consideration of eight or ten charges 
of ammunition each, or two or three awls, or any other thing of propor- 
tional value. SkiUS are very abundant in these parts, as the natives, owing 
to the scarcity of bufialo, subsist entirely upon small game, which is found 
in immense quantities. This trade is quite profitable. The articles pro- 
cured 80 cheaply, when taken to Santa Fe and the neighboring towns, find 
a ready cash market at prices ranging from one to two dollars each. 

The Snakes, or Shoshones, live in the eastern part of Oregon and m 
Upper California, upon the waters of the Great Snake and Bear rivers, and 
the two streams which unite to form the Colorado. 



VIEW OF UPPER CALIFORNIA. 233 

They are Mendly to the whites, and less disposed to appropriate to their 
own use everything they can lay hands on, than some otlier tribes. The> 
seldom go to war, though by no means deficient in bravery, — ^frequently re- 
sisting with signal success the hostile encroachments of the Sioux and 
Chyennes. Rich in horses and game, they likewise include within their 
territory many interesting and beautiful localities, as well as some extraor- 
dinary natural curiosities. 

One division of this tribe is identified with the Diggers in habits and 
mode of living, — ^the same causes operating in each case to produce tbe 
same results. Another division is identifi^ with the Crows, and yet a 
third one with the Utahs, — numbering in all not far from twelve thousand. 

Being less migratory in their habits, and more tractable in their disposition 
than those of their eastern brethi'en demontes, they are far more susceptible 
of civilization and improvement ; though, as yet, nothing has been done for 
their benefit. The nussionary might here find an encouraging field for his 
philanthropic exertions. 

With the passage of the mountain chain, noticed in the preceding chap- 
ter, the reader is inducted to the northeastern extremity of California. 
My intention of visiting the interior of tliis interesting province of the 
Mexican Republic was frustrated through the lack of a convenient oppor^ 
tunity for its prosecution ; but, as the public mind, during the past few 
years, has been so much occupied with subjects connected with this coun- 
tiy, I am unwilling to pass on without presenting a brief description of 
it, obtained from sources upon which full reliance may be placed. 

The following sketch, coupled with my own observations, is carefully 
arranged from information derived from indviduals encountered during my 
stay in this country, some of whom had travelled over most of it, and 
others had resided for years within its confines. 

On referring to the map, a large extent of country will be noticed, 
bounded upon the north by Oregon, east by the Rocky Mountains, south 
by the Lower Province and Gulf of California, together with the Rio Gila 
which separates it from Sonora, and west by the Pacific, situated between 
peraliels 32^ and 42^ north latitude, which is now known as Upper CaU* 
fomia. 

This embraces an extent of nearly 460,000 square miles, and is walled 
in for the most part upon the north and east by lofty mountains, impassable 
except at certain points ; while upon the west and south its vast stretch of 
searcoast, navigable rivers, and commodious harbors open it to the commer- 
cial intercourse of all nations. 

The entire country is more or less broken by hills and mountains, many 
of them towering to a height of several thousand feet above the level of 
the sea, whose summits, clothed with eternal snow, overlook the vsdleys of 
perennial verdure that so frequently lie around them. The most noted of 
these is the California, or Cascade range, which, bv intersecting the prov- 
ince from north to south, separates it into two grand natural divisions, pro- 
ps^ denominated Eastern and Western California. 
' The above range, though higher than the principal chain of the Rocky 
ICountains, is passable at various points. It is situated inland from tbie 

20* 



Sa4 . THE GREAT 8ALT LAKE, ETC. 

Pacific at difltancee vaijing from one hundred and fifty to four hundred 
miles, tracing its way with diminished altitude adown the isthmns that 
forms the Lower Province. 

Owing to its locality, a description of the Eastern Division seems to 
eome naturally the first in order. 

This section is watered principally by the Colorado, Gila, and Bear riv- 
ers, with their numerous tributaries, and has also several laikes in various 
parts of it, prominent among which is the Great Salt Lake near the north- 
ern bounda^. 

This large body of water is nearly one hundred and fifty miles long fay 
eighty broad ; and, though the receptacle ot' several large rivers, has no 
visible outlet, and hence is supposed by many persons to hold subterranean 
connection with the Ocean. Its waters are so strongly impregnated with 
salt, incrui^tations of that mineral are frequently found upon its shores. 

Towards the northern extremity an island makes its appearance, from 
whose centre a solitary mountain rises in proud majesty for nearly a thon* 
sand feet above the circumfluent waters ; its craggy sides, naked and des- 
olate, with whitened surface, now inspire the beholder with feelings of 
awe, while its bounding streamlets, skirted with verdant openings and di- 
minutive trees, strike the eye pleasantly, as the sheen of tneir waters feJls 
upon the vision and engenders conmiingled sensations of delight and ad- 
miration. 

Viewed from the northern shore, this island seems not more than twelve 
miles distant ; a deception caused by the extraordinary purity of the at- 
mosphere. ^Several attempts to reach it, however, by means of canoes, 
have proved futile, owing to its great distance the dangerous state of navi- 
gation. 

It is thought by many persons that still other islands of larger dimeih 
sions occupy the centre of the lake, and not without some show of reason; 
tliere is ample room for them, and, although this vast body of water hae 
been circum-traversed per shore, it has never yet been otherwise explored 
by man * 

The largest of the rivers that find their discharge in this vast saline re^ 
servoir is tbe Big Bear, a stream which rises near the South Pass, aad, 
following its meanderings, is about two hundred and fifty or three handled 
miles in length. It rolls leisurely on with its deep sluggish volume of 
waters, measuring some two hundred yards wide at its mouth, and depos- 
ites its willing tribute into the bosom of this miniature ocean, while loor 
or five other fresh water affluents from the east and south make a like dfr* 
bouche without increasing its size or diminishing its saltness. 

The valleys of these streams possess a very rich soil and are well tioii- 
bered. The landscape adjacent to the lake is diversified with manbes, 
plains, highlands, and mountains, afibrding every variety of scenery. Thp 
Boil is generally fertile and prolific in all kinds of vegetation as well if 
fruits indigenous to the country. 

* Recently, however, Capt. FVemont reports his having succeeded in leadifiiig d# 
«sland nearest to the northern shore, but he was unfortunately jnrevented a fiHtheif 
«Lpl<MUtiun. In his account of this he makes ho mention of trees or streams o€ water 
upon the mountain. I have described it only as h appears when viewed liooi A9 
nudn land. 



DESCRIPTION OF EAflTERN SKCnON S35 

lumber also abounds in sufficient quantity for all necessaTv purposes 
Crame too is found in ^leat abundance, particularly deer and elk ; and, ta* 
ken as a whole, the vicinity of the Great Salt Lake holds out strong in- 
ducements to settlers, and is capable of sustaining, as it will no doubt ulti- 
mately possess, a dense population. 

Forty or fifty miles west and south from this the traveller is inducted to 
the vast expanse of sand and gravel, lying between lat 36^ and 40^ noith, 
which is almost entirely destitute of both wood and water. 

This reach is upwards of three hundred miles in length and nearly two 
hundred broad. It is impassable at aU seasons of the year on account of 
its extreme dryness and lack of suitable nourishment for animals ; and even 
a trip from Santa Fe to Western California, by the regular trail, is rarely 
undertaken except in the fall and spring months, at which time the ground 
is rendered moist by annual rains and the transient streams venture to 
emerge from their sandy hiding places. 

The Digger country, of which I have taken occasion to speak in con- 
nection with its unfortunate inhabitants, lies upon the eastern and southern 
extremities of this desolate waste, and presents an aspect little less for- 
bidding. 

As a general thing the landscape is highly undulating and varied with 
conical hills, some of which are mere heaps of naked sand or sun-baked 
day of a whitish hue ; others, vast piles of granitic rock, alike destitute of 
Teffetation or timber; while yet others are clotlied with a scanty herbage 
and occasional clusters of stunted pines and cedars. 

Now and then a diminutive vega intervenes in fiivorable contrast to the 
fiurrounding desolation, greeting the beholder with its rank grasses, mingled 
with blushing prairie-flowers. But such beauty-spots are by no means 
fi^uent. 

The watercourses are mere beds of sand, skirted with sterile bottoms of 
stiff clay and gravel, and aflbrd streams only at their heads, while, for 
nearly the entire year, both dew and rain are unknown. Vegetation, con- 
sequently, is sparse and unpromising, and the whole section of necessity 
xemains depopulated of game. 

it is neealess to say such a country can never become inhabited by civil* 
ized man. 

Between the Colorado river and the California mountains, south of the 
cheerless desert above described, the prospect is far more flattering. The 
hills are of varied altitude and are usually clothed witJi grass ancTtimber; 
while comparatively few of them are denuded to any great extent. The 
landscape is highly picturesque and pleasingly diversified with mountains, 
hills, plains, and valleys, which afibrd every variety of climate and soil. 

This section is principally watered by the Kio Virgen and lateral 
itreams ; and, though little or no rain falls in the summer months, the co- 
piousness of nightly dews in some measure make up for this defect 

The superfice of the valleys ranges from one to three feet in depth, and 
Scneially consists of sedimentary deposites and the debris of rocks, borne 
nom the neighboring hills by aqueous attrition, which, mingled with & 
jhik-colOTed loam compounded of cla^ and sand, and various organic and 
'Vegetable remains, unite to form a soil of admirable fecundity, rarely equai- 
Woy that of any other country. 



296 LANDSCAPE SCENES. 

The hills, however, are unfit for cultivation to any gre^l extent, owing 
to thoir common sterility as well as the abundance of rock in many parts ; 
yet they might serve a good purpose for grazing lands. 

The prevailing rock is saia to be sandstone, limestone, mica slate, trap^ 
and basalt ; the minerals, copper, iron, coal, salt^ and sulphur. 

Grame exists in great abundance, among which are included antelope^ 
deer, (black and white-tailed,) elk, bear, and immense quantities of water- 
fowls ; large herds of wild horses and cattle, also, are not unfrequently 
met with. 

Timber is usually a scarce article, which constitutes one grand fault in 
the entire section of Eastern California. This evil, however, is partially re- 
medied by a mild climate, and only a comparatively small amount of wood 
is required for building, foncing, and fuel. 

Fruits of all kinds indigenous to the country, particularly grapes, are 
found in great profusion, and those native only to the torrid and temperate 
zones may also be successfully cultivated. 

Among tlie grasses, grains, and vegetables growing spontaneously in 
some parts, are red-clover and oats, (which atttain a most luxuriant bulk,) 
flax and onions; the latter not unfrequently equalling in size the proudest 
products of the far- farmed gardens of Wethersfield. 

We are now naturally led back to the Colorado, and the country lying 
between it and the Sierra de los Mimbros range, on the east. This division 
embraces much choice land in its valleys, but the high grounds and hills 
present much of the dryness and sterility incident to the grand praries. 

The valley of the Colorado averages from five to fifteen miles broad, for 
a distance of nearly two hundred miles above its mouth. 

Further on, the passage of the river through high mountains and tierras 
templadas (table lands) presents an almost continuous gorge of vertical 
and overhanging rocks, that, closing in upon the subfluent stream at a va- 
ried height of from fifteen to six hundred or even a thousand feet, afiSnd 
only an occasional diminutive opening to its waters. 

This vast canon is said to extend for five or six hundred miles, interrupt- 
ing the river with numerous cataracts, cascades and rapids, and opposing 
to its swift current the sharp fragments of severed rocks thrown from the 
dizzy eminences, as breakers, by which to lash the gurgling waters and 
depict the more than tempest-tossed foam and maddened fury of old ocean ! 

In some places the impending rocks approach so near to each other from 
above, a person may almost step across the vast chasm opening to view the 
foaming river, half obscured in perpendicular distance and dimmed by the 
eternal shadows of tlirice vertical walls. 

This superbly magnificent scene continues nearly the entire extent, from 
ihe head of the Colorado valley to the boundary between Oregon and Cali- 
fomia. 

The table lands and mountains on both sides, as a whole, discloee a 
a dreary prospect. Now, the traveller meets with a wide reach of naked 
rock paving tne surface to the exclusion of grass, shrubs, or tree, — ^now«a 
narrow fissure, filled with detritus and earth, sustains a few stunted pinea,*- 
now, a spread of hard sun-baked clay refuses root to aught earth-growiog,-* 
now, a small space of saline efflorescences obtrudes upon the vision iti 
snowy incrustations, alike repulsive to vegetable life ^toen, comes a brodi 



DfHABITANl'S. 287 

area clothed with thin coarse grass ; an opening vdUon next greeta the ej% 
in the generous growth of its herbage and the fertility of its k»1 ; a beaati- 
ful grove of stately pines, cedars, and pinions, rises in the back ground ; a. 
Btill larger, more expansive, and thrice lovely valley, skirts the banks of 
some boundin? stream, and delights the fancy with its smiling flowers and 
luxuriant verdure. 

Here, a huge mountain rears itself in majestv— now, piling heaps upon heaps 
of naked granite, limestone, sandstone, and basalt, variegated and pirti-col- 
ored, — now, thickly studded with lateral pines, cedars, pinions, and hem- 
locks, — then, again denuded, till at last its sharpened peaks pierce the clouds 
while storms and tempests in their wild orgies haste to do it reverence. 
There, a lesser, coniform elevation of the continuous chain, is mantled in 
living green ; while perhaps by its side, another pains the eye with the 
well defined lineaments of desolation. 

A country of this description occupies nearly the whole interval from 
the two mam branches of the Colorado to the dividing ridge of mountains. 

The valleys of the Uintali, and several other affluents within its limits, 
however, are broad, fertile and tolerably well timbered. Grass continues 
green nearly the entire winter, and game of all kinds common to the moun- 
tains, excepting bnflalo, is abundant The valley soils are well adapted to 
cultivation, and might sustain a large population. 

We come now to the southeastern extremity of the province, bordering 
upon the Rio Gila which separates it from^Sonora, and lying between the 
Colorado and the Sierra de los Mimbros range. 

This stretch, though less fertile as a general thins;, partakes of much the 
same characteristics as that upon the opposite side of the Colorado, and 
upon Rio Virgen, south of the Digger country, which was so fully described 
upon a former page. The soil, however, is not generally so sandy, and the 
landscape is far more rough and broken. The TOttoms of the Colorado and 
Gila, with their tributaries, are broad, rich, and well timbered. Everything 
in the shape of vegetation attains a lusty size, amply evincing the exuber- 
ent fecundity of the soil producing it. 

There are many sweet spots in the vicinity of both these streams, well 
deserving the name of earthly E^dens. Man here might &re sumptuously, 
with one continued feast spread before him by the spontaneous products oi 
the earth, and revel in perennial spring or luxurate amid unfading summer. 

Yet, notwithstanding the other attractions held out, game is much less 
plentiful in this than in other parts^ — ^probably owing to the warmth of the 
climate. 

Winter is unknown, and the only thing that marks its presence from that 
of other seasons, is a continuation of rainy and damp weather for some two 
or three months. All the wild fruits and grains indigenous to the conntij 
are found here in profuse abundance. 

The entire Eastern Division of Upper California possesses & uniformly 
SBlubrious and .healthful atmosphere. Sickness, so far as my knowledge 
extmb, is raiely known. 

The natives, for the most part, may be considered friendly, or at least, 
not dangerous. Some of them, in the neighborhood of the GUa and the 
Gulf of California are partially advanced in civilization, and cultivate tbe 
gEonnd, raising com, melons, pumpkins, beans, potatoes, &c* 



tS8 ROUTES FROM THE UNTTfiD STATES. 

These live in fixed halNtations, constructed of wood, and coated 
aaith, in a conical form, much like Pawnee hute. 

The condition and character of these tribes present most flattering in- 
ducements for missionary enterprise ; and, should eflbrts for their amehora- 
tion be put forth bj zeaJous ana devoted men, (and meet with no countei^ 
acting opposition irom the united influence of the Mexican Government and 
the narrow minded bigotry of an intolerent clergy and priest-ridden people,) 
a glorious fruition of uieir most sanguine hopes might soon be expected. 

There are no settlements of either whites or Mexicans, to my knowledge, 
tbrouffhout the whole extent of this territoiy. Indians may, therefore, oe 
consideredHts only inhabitants, other than the strolling parties of trappers 
and traders that now and then travel it, or temporarily establish themselves 
within its limits. Of course then the Eastern Division of Upper Caliibr- 
nia must be considered without a people or a government. 

The Rio Colorado rises in the U. S. territory about lat 42** SC north, 
interlocking with the head waters of the Columbia, Missouri, Platte, and 
Arkansas, and empties into the Gulf of California near lat 32^ north. 
Following its windings it is some twelve or fifteen hundred miles in length. 
This stream with its numerous tributaries is the only river worth naming in 
Eastern California, and, to a great extent, serves to water that country. 
Owing to the rapidity of its current and its frequent falls and cascades, the 
navigation is entirely destroyed, till within about one hundred miles of its 
mouth, at the head of tide water ; from this on no further interruption oc- 
curs, and the depth is sufficient for vessels bearing several hundred tons 
burthen. 

The Gila is properly a river of Sonora, though commonly regarded as flie 
northern boundary of that province. It rises in the 8ierra de los Mimbros, 
Bear lat. 33^ 26' north, long. 106^ 15' west from Greenwich, and pursues 
a west-southwesterly course till it discharges itself into the Bay of the 
Colorodo, at lat. 32^ 16' north, long. 114° 27 west. 

Its whole length is about eight hundred miles, for most of which distance 
navigation is impracticable, with the exception of some forty miles or more 
lU its mouth. 

Those two rivers are said to aflbrd immense quantities of fish, especially 
near their confluence with the Gulf of California. 

The Gulf also contains a large variety and exhaustless sumdies of the 
finny tribe, together with seversu species of the crustaceous and testaceous 
order. Among the last named are lobstens, crabs, clams, and oysters. 

Oysters are very numerous and of an excellent quality, including in 
variety the genuine mother pearl, A small trade in the shells of the pearl 

Sister is carried on with the Arapahoe, Chyennes, and Sioux, l^ the 
paniards, which yields a very hurge profit, — a single shell fi^equently 
bringing from six to ei^ht robes. These Indians make use of them for 
ear-ornaments, and exhibit no little taste in their shape and finish. 

The eastern section of Upper California is accessiUe by land as well as 
sea from several feasible passep through the mountain ranges forming M 
Mstem boundanr. 

The best lana routes for waggons from the United States is through the 
South Pa ig < I ho noe, to the Great Salt Lake by Bear river valley, — uenoe 



WESIXRN CAUFOBNIA. 899 



» VXXW •(JWMM WU'' *« > «*'^^»'*>^«^^'>'^i'»* 



the emignuit can direct his conne to any part of the conntry, as interest or 
inclination may suggest. 

Another pass is affiurded by way of the Santa Fe trail near lat. 37^ 
north ; this, however, is a very difficult one f(Nr waggons, and should only 
be travelled oa horseback. 

There are said to be one or two other passes further south, in reference 
to which I cannot speak with certainty, but am inclined to accredit their 
reported existence. 



CHAPTER XXIIl. 



Minerals. — Western California. — ^The Sacramento and conoguoiu regions. — Principal 
rivers. — Fish. — Commercial advantages — Bay of San Francisco. — Other Bays and 
Harbors. — Description of the country ; territory nwlhwesfc of the Sacramento ; 
Tlaiiiath mountains ; California range and its vicinity; Southern parts; timber^ 
river-bottoms ; Valleys of Sacramento, del Plumas, and Tulare ; their extent, fertility, 
timber and fruit ; wild grain and clover, spontaneous ; wonderful fecundity of soil, 
and its products ; the productions, climate, rains and dews ; geological and mineralogi- 
cal character ; face of the country ; its water ; its healthiness ; game ; superabun- 
dance of cattle, horses, and sheep, their prices, dec. ; beasts of prey ; the inhabit' 
tants, who ; Indians, tlieir character and condition ; Capital of the Province, with 
other towns ; advantages of San Francisco ; inland settlements ; foreigners and 
Mexicans ; Government ; its fuQ military strength. — Remarks. 

In the preceding chapter the reader must have acquired some tangible 
idea of the true condition of Eastern California, with all its varied beauties 
and deformities ; its Bdens and wastes of desolation ; its enchantments, and 
scenes of awe and terrtiic grandeur. 

To have treated the subject more in exienso, would have trespassed upon 
prescribed brevity ; yet, doubtless, many will regret my having said so little 
relative to the mineralogical character aaid resources of that country. The 
truth is, comparatively little is known upon this important matter. Were 
I to give ear to common report, I would say there are both gold and silver, 
with copper, lead, and iron. But such stories are not always to be credited 
unless they come in a credible shape. 

However, it is very probable these metals do exist in various parts; and 
certain it is that immense beds of coal and rock-salt are aflorded, with 
large quantities of gypsum, the truth of which is placed beyond doubt by an 
accumulation of testimony. With these few remarks I turn from the subjects 
and bring before the reader another and more interesting topic. 

Following the only practicable waggon route from the U. S. to Western 
California, via Soutli Pa&s, — ^thence, after bearing northwest some forty 
miles, by a long sweep southward around the Sierra Nei^uia to the Rio 
Sacrimento, — ^the emigrant is taken through a succession of mountainSy 
bills, plains, and valleys, furrowed by frequent affluents from the north ;*— 
iV>w, sterile wastes of intervening sand ; now, pleasant spreads of arable 



840 ABUNDANCE OF ITBH. 

prairies ; now, mned eaperfices of naked rock ; then, be&ntifiil vaUeys 
arrayed in all the loveliness of perennial verdure, and profuse in vegetation 
of extniordinaiy growth, intermixed with wild-flowers of anrivalled hues 
and lavish fragrance, till he finally reaches his destination. 

The Sacramento and its tributaries water the greater part of Western 
California. 

This river is formed by the confluence of two large streams which rise 
in the Cascade Mountains, properly termed the North and South Fork? 
tiie former heading near hit 41^ 43' north, long. 114^^1' West. (The Soma 
Fork is the stream defining the waggon route from the U. States, via Soati 
Pass.) 

The Sacramento, measured by its windmgs, is about eight hundred and 
fifty miles in length. It receives many important auxiliaries above the 
junction of its two forks, which greatly increase the volume and depth of 
its waters. From its mouth it is said to afibrd a good stave of navigation 
for crafts of tolerable burthen, as high up as mee hundred miles, — ^tide 
water ^tting back for one hundred and fifty miles. 

Three other rivers, flowing^ from the southeast, have their discharge in 
the Bay of San Francisco. These streams are severally called the Rio del 
Plumas, American Fork, and Tulare. 

The former derives its name from the great abundance of water-fowls 
which congregate upon it at aU seasofus of the year, so numerous and 
tame that the natives nut unfrequently kill large quantities of them with 
clubs or stones as they flv through the air. 

The del Plumas is said to be navigable, for boats of a light draught, till 
within a hundred miles of its head^ — its whole leogth is ab(Mkt two hundred 
and fifty miles. The American Fork, or the Rio de los Americanos^ is a 
clear and beautiful stream about one hundred and fifty miles long, emptying 
into the Sacramento Bay below the del Plumas, and between it and the 
Tulare. Owing to frequent rapids, however, its navigation is destroyed. 

The Tulare is said to be four hundred miles long, and navigable for one 
half that distance. It is represented as watering one of the most interest- 
ing sections of Western California, and hence is considered next in impor- 
tance to the Sacramento. This stream afS>rds some of the finest localities 
for settlements found in the whole country. 

Below the Bay of San Francisco several other small streams find their 
way into the Pacific, but none of them are navigable to any great extent 
The principal of these em^y as follows : into the Bay of Monterey, into 
the Ocean near Point del Esteros, Point Aiguello, St Barbara Channel, 
San Pedro Bay, and opposite the island of St Clement 

Above the Bay of San Francisco, Russian river is discharged into Bodega 
Bay ; further on, Smith's river empties into Trinidad Bay ; and two other 
amall streams find their discharge near Point St. George, a few miles bek>w 
the boundary line between Oregon and California. 

Smith's river is the largest stream either above or below the Bay 
of San Francisco, and is alwut two hundred miles in iMigth, though nn- 
aavisable. 

AU these various rivers and their affluents are stored with innumerable 
■ttpplies of delicious fish, the principal of which' are salmon aiMl eaimon- 
tiont The Ocean too affi>rds an ^austless qoantily of Uie piscatorial 



80IL» CLIMATE, ETC. HI 

fionily, including whales, cod,, and haddock, with oysten, clams, lobsten. 

So great is the abundance of fish at certain seasons, that, with a nde 
seine, the natives frequently take fifteen or twenty barrels full at a sin|^ 
draught ; fish constituting their principal subsistence. 

There are few, if any, countries in the world possessed of superior com* 
uercial advantages to the western section of Upper California. 

True, its inland navigation is hmited ; yet, with an extent of nearly eight 
hnndred miles of sea-coast, accessible at almost any point, it includes some 
of the finest bays and harbors ever known. Of these, for commodiousneM 
and safety at aU times, the Bay of San Francisco stands pre-eminently coih 
spicnons. 

This bay is an arm of the sea eztendinfi^ some fortjr miles or more inland* 
shut in, for the most part, upon each side by precipitous banks of basalt 
and trap, that skirt a very broken and hilly country conti^ous to it. The 
entrance from the ocean is by an opening, a mile or more m width, through 
rock-formed walls, between one and two hundred feet high. A rec^ 
traveller,* in describing this bay, says :•— 

^ From the points forming the entrance, the sea graduaMy expands to 
some eight or ten miles in extent, from north to souDi, and twelve from 
east to west At the extreme eastern part of the vast basin thus formed, 
its shores again close in abruptly, contracting so as to leave a pass of about 
two miles in width, which forms the entrance to a second bay of still larger 
dimensions. From this gorge their high rocky banks again diverge Tor 
some ten miles, when they still again contract to the narrow space of one 
mile, and form the passage to a third. The latter is more spacious than 
either before mentioned, and, formed in like manner, extends twelve miles 
from east to west and fifteen from north to south, affording the safiMt 
and most commodious anchorage." 

There is ample wat^ at all times for the entrance of ships of the l&f jjwt 
class, and it is asserted confidently, that these three united biys would amird 
perfect safety, secure anchorage, and ample room for the fleets and navies 
of all nations. 

Several other bays and harbors'are situated along the coast, all of which, 
to a greater or less extent, are favorably spoken of for general safety and 
good anchorage. 

Among the above are mentioned the Bay of Monterey, San Pedro, St 
Diego, Bodega, and Trinidad. Bodega, however, is represented as bein^ 
at times» very unsafe and ^ven dangerous. 

With such extraordinary facilities for commerce, it needs no prophetio 
eye to forsee the position Western California is destined to assume, before 
many years have passed, and, from her position and natural resources, will 
be enabled successfuUy to maintain among the foremost nations of the 
earth — ^provided, always, that some other people more enterprising and en- 
Hghtened than the present inert, ignorant, stupid, and mongrel race infest- 
ing it with their presence, take possession of the country, develop its enev- 
gies and bring to light the full beauty of its natural lovliness. 

We are now led to speak of the peculiarities of soil, landscape, scenery 

*Hastiiiffi. 
21 



9tt' COUNTRY BELOV/ THE SACRAMENTO. 



tfil^MMAA'^'^tf^'^'^^^^^' ' 



efimate, productions, and mineral resources of thi^ interestixi£^ countiy , 
and in so doin^, I woald first draw a succinct view of the temtoiy lying 
between the Rio Sacramento and Oregon. 

Here we find the most forbidding aspect, with one exception, of any in 
Western Califomia« The soil is generally very dry and barren, and the 
fkce of the country broken and hilly. The streams of water (as in tlie 
Eastern Division) frequently sink and become lost in the sand, or force 
themselves into the Ocean and parent streams by percolation or subterrane- 
an passages. 

In many places is presented a surface of white sun-baked clay, entirely 
destitute of ve^tation; and in others, wide spreads of sand, alike denuded; 
and yet again iron-bound superfices of igneous rock. 

Now and then groves of pines or firs spread their broad branches as it 
were to cover the nakedness of nature ; wnile here and there a valley of 
gpreater or less extent smiles amid the surrounding desolation. 

All the various streams are skirted with bottoms of arable soil, ofttimes 
not only large but very fertile, though perhaps unadapted to cultivation, on 
account of their dryness, without a resort to irription. 

Smith's river pursues its way, for forty or fifty miles, through a wide 
bottom of rich soil, most admirably suited for agricultural purposes were it 
not for its innate aridity ; — however, during the summer season, it is, to a 
limited extent, watered from nightly dews, which enable it to sustain a 
luxuriant vegetation. 

Not one fourth part of the northwestern portion of this section is fit for 
tillage. That part contiguous to the sea^oast is sandy and far less broken 
than those sections less interior. 

The Tlameth Mountains, pursuing a west-southwest course from Oregon, 
strike the roast near lat. 41^ north. This range has several lofty peaks 
covered witli perpetual snow, and shoots its collateral eminences far into the 
adjacent prairies. 

There is one feasible pass through this chain a few miles inland fix>m the 
coast, that serves well for the purpose of intercommunication with Oregon. 

The less elevated parts of these mountains are frequently covered with 
pfToves of small timber and openings of grass suitable for pasturage, while 
mtcrminglcd with them are occasional valleys uid prairiUons of diminutive 
space, favorable to the growth of grain and vegetables. The same may be 
said in reference to the California chain for its whole extent, especially in 
the vicinity of the prairie. 

Following the course of this latter ridge from north to south, we find 
upon both sides a reach of very broken and highly tumulous landscape, 
some twenty or thirty miles broad. 

Ne«ir the head-waters of the Sacramento, these lands are well watered 
uid possess a general character for fertilib^, producing ai variety of grass, 
with shrubs and a few scattering trees. Below, however, they are more 
•terile, owing to the deficiency of water ; but yettheyafiTord numerous mvit- 
mg spots. 

A considerable extent of country, south of the South Fork of the river 
above named, is arid and sterile, and has but few streams of water. It sqs- 
tains, however, among its hills and in its valleys, a sparse vegetation that 



EXTIUORDlINARY PBODUCTIVSNESS. 9M 

might be turned to & favoimble account for grazing purpoaea. Only about 
one fourth of this country is adapted to other uses than atoekHmiaing. 

Further south from the head-waters of the Tulare and del Plumas, rang* 
ing between the coast and the high rolling lands skirting the base of the 
Cuifomia Mountains to the boundary of the Lower Province, a section of 
gently undulating prairie, now and then varied with high hills and some* 
times mountains, affi)rds a rich soil, eenerally consisting of dark, sandy 
loam, between the hills and in the vaUeys ; the highlands present a super- 
fice of clay and gravel, fertilized by decomposed vegetable matter, well 
adapted to grazing, and about one half of it susceptible of cultivation. 

Timber is rather scarce, except at intervals along the watercourses and 
occasional groves among the hills ; but along the coast dense forests are 
frequently found claiming trees of an enormous size. 

But, one grand defect exists in its genera] aridity, which renders neces- 
sary a resort to frequent irrigation in the raising of other thiw grain pro> 
ducts. In some parts, the abundance of small streams would cause this 
task to become comparatively an easy one ; and the profuseness of dews 
in sections contiguous to the rivers in some measure answers as a substi- 
tute for rain. • 

The bottoms are broad and extensive, yielding not only the most extraor* 
duiary crops of clover and other grasses, but in^culable quantities of wild 
oats and flax of spontaneous growth, with all the wild fruits natural to the 
climate. 

In returning to the Sacramento and the rivers which find their dischar- 
ges in the Bay of San Francisco, we have before us the most interesting 
and lovely part of Upper California. 

The largest valley in the whole country is that skirting the Sacramento 
and lateral streams. This beautiful expanse leads inland from the Bay of 
San Francisco for nearly four hundred miles, almost to the base of the Cal- 
ifornia Mountains, and averages between sixty and sixty-five miles in 
width. 

The valleys of the del Plumas and American Fork are also verv large, 
and that of the Tulare gives an area of two hundred and fifty miles long 
by thirty-five broad. 

These valleys are comparatively well timbered with several varieties of 
wood, consisting principally of white-oak, live-oak, ash, cottonwood, cherry, 
and willow, while the adjacent hills afford occasional forests of pine, cedar, 
fir, pinion, and spruce. 

The soil as well as the climate is well adapted to the cultivation of all 
kinds of mXn and vegetables produced in the United States, and many of 
the varied fruits of the torrid and temperate zones can be successfully reax^ 
cd in one and the same latitude. 

Among the grains, grasses, and fruits indigenous to the country are 
wheat, rye, oats, flax, and clover, (white and red,) with a great variety of 
grapes, all of which are said to grow spontaneously. 

Wild oats frequently cover immense spreads of bottom and prairie land, 
sometimes to an extent of several thousand acres, which resemble in ap* 
pearance the species common to the United States. They usually grow to 
a height of between two uid three feet, though they often reach a height 
of seven feet. 



S44 GEOLOGY AND MINERALS. 

The wild clover of these valleys is maeh like the common red, and, in 
some places, is afEMed in gieat abundance. It attains a usual height of 
two wet and a half, though it often measores twice that height — etending 
as thick as it can well grow. 

Forty bushels per acre is said to be the average wheat crop, but sizlr 
and even one hundred bushels have been grown upon a like spot of ffronnd. 
This grain generally reaches its maturily in three or four months from 
the time of sowing. 

Com yiekb weD, and affords an average of from fifty to sixty bush^ 
per acre, without fiurther attention from the time of plantmg till picking, 
rotatoes, onions, beets, carrots, dLc., may be produced m any quantity with 
very little trouble. Tobacco has also been raised by some of the inhabit* 
ants with most flattering success. 

Perhaps, no country in the world is possessed of a richer or more fruft- 
ful soil, or one capable of yielding a greater variety of productions, than 
the valleys of the Sacramento and its tributaries. 

The articles previously noticed are more or less commcm to the bottoms 
and valleys of other sections. Grapes abound in the vicinity of most of 
the creekis, which aflbrd generous wines and delicious raisins in immense 
quantities. 

The climate is so mild that fires are needed at no season of the year lor 
other than cooking purposes. By aid of irrigation, many kinds of vegeta- 
bles are fresh-grown at any time, while two crops of some species of 
grain may be produced annually. 

Flowers are not unfrequently in full bloom in mid winter, and all nature 
bears a like smiling aspect, tn this, however, we of course refer only to 
the low-lands and valleys. 

The traveller at any season of the vear may visit at his option the frosts 
and snows of eternal winter, or feast his eyes upon the verdure and beauty 
of perennial spring, or glut his taste amid the luxuriant abundance and rich 
maturity of unenmng summer, or indulge his changeful fancy in the en- 
joyment of a magnificent variety of scenery as well as of climate, soil, 
and productions. 

The only rains incident to this countiy fall during the months of De- 
cember, January, February, and March, which constitute the winter ; at 
other times rain is very rarely known to fall. Perhaps, for one third of the 
four months before named, the clouds pour down their torrents without in- 
termission ; the remaining two thirds afS>rd clear and delightful weatlier. 

During the wet season the ground in manv parts becomes so thoroughly 
saturated with moisture, particularly^ in the valley of the Sacramento, 
that, by the aid of copious oews to which the country is subject, crops may 
be raised without the trouble of irrigation ; though its general aridity con- 
stitutes the greatest objection to California. ' 

Of its geological and mineralogical character little is yet known. The 
prevailing rock is said to be sandstone, mica slate, granite, trap, basalt, 
puddingstone, and limestone, with occasional beds oi gypsum. Among 
Its minerals as commonly reported^ are found gold, silver, iron, coal, and a 
variety of salts. The mineral resources of the country have not been as 
yet fully investigated to any great extent, but the mountains, in difibrent 
parts, are supposed to be rich m hidden stores. 



GREAT ABUNDANCE OF STOCK. 345 



To speak of Western Califoniia as a whole, it may be pronoiineed hiUj, 
if not mountainoiis, and about two thirds of it is probably fit for agricaltup 
lalparposes. 

The creeks are fieqaently immured by precimtouB walls of several hund- 
red feet in altitude, that, expanding here and tnere, give place to beautiful 
vallevs of variable widUi, while most of the low-Unds upon their banks 
ate skirted by continuous and abrupt acclivities leadinff to the high prai* 
ries, table lands, and mountains contiguous to them. Their currents are 
generallv clear and rapid, flowing over beds of sand, pebbles, and rock, and 
afibrd wholeaome and delicious water. 

The air is ahnost invariaUy pure and free from the noxious exhalations 
common to many countries, which contributes ffreatly to render the climate 
uniformlyhealthy — a character which it has hitherto sustained by common 
iep<Hrt 

Some travellers, however, speak of large Indian villages in different 
parts, deserted and in ruins, whose sites are bestrown with human bones 
and sculb, as if the entire population had been swept off by the frightful 
lavages of deadly pestilence, and so suddenly that not a soul was let't to 

S their dead ; and hence tbey suppose the country occasionally subject 
ivastating sicknesses* The above, however, may with equal propriety 
be charged to the account of war. 

Game is quite plentiful in the Western Division of Upper California, 
and in many places extremelv abundant, especially in the mountains 
near the head -waters of the Tulare and Sacramento nvers. 

Amonff the different varieties are enumerated deer, (black-tailed and 
white-taUed,) elk, antelope, goats, bear, (black, red, and grizzly,} beaver, 
geese, brants, ducks, ana grouse, with wild horses and cattle ; — buffiUo 
are unknown to the Province. 

Never was a country better adapted to stock-raising than is this, and 
perhaps none, according to the number of its inhabitants, so abundantly 
supplied with horses, cattle, and sheep. The former of these abound in 
countless numbers, whenever a white man or a Spanio-Mexican makes it 
his residence. A single individual frequently owns from ei^ht to ten thou* 
sand head of horses tmd mules ; and, not rarely, even as high as fifteen or 
twenty thousand. 

These animals are very hardv and trim-built, and only a trifle smaller 
than those common to the United States. I have seen many of them equal* 
ly as large as the American breed, and, as a general thing, they are more 
durable under iieitigae and hardship. 

The choicest animals from'ti band of several thousand may be purchas* 
ed for ten dollars, and the ordinary price for prime selections ranges from 
tbree to five dollars, while mares may be procured for two doUars per head. 

Cattle are equally plenty, at prices varying from two to four dollars per 
head. 

Stock is raised without trouble, as the abundance of grass aflbrds pas- 
turage the entire season, nor is necessary a resort to either hay or house. 
In f£;t, both cattle and horses not only thrive best but are fattest in the 
winter season, owing to the absence of flies and insects, as well as the 
partial freshness of vegetation. 

The common method of stock-raising is by turning them loose into the 

21* 



a*6 PRINCIPAL TOWNS. 

bottoms and prairies, accompanied by a berdsman, or two, or more, a la 
Mexican, (according to tbe size of the band,} where they are left to in- 
crease, and no further care is bestowed upon them. 

Bheep too are raised in vast numbers after the above manner. They in- 
crease with astonishing rapidity, and usually produce their young twice a 
year. Their wool, however, is much coarser than tiiat grown in the 
United States. This latter fact is accounted for by their inferiority of 
breed, though their flesh is sweeter and better than the American mat- 
ton. 

Wolves are said to be numerous and troublesome, and not onfreqnently 
prove a source of great annoyance to the inliabitants by destroying their 
sheep, calves, colts, and even full-grown cattle and horses. 

Among them are included die buick, gray, and prairie wolf. The black 
wolf is the largest and most ferocious, equalling the size of our comnnm 
cur-dog. 

Foxes are also said to be numerous, but are of a diminutive size. The 
above are the only beasts of prev worth naming. 

The foregoing summaiy leads us to notice the present state of the 
country, its inhabitants, government, and militaiy strength. 

Upper California at the present time is in the united possession of 
the Indians, Mexicans, English, and French; not as rulers, but as 
land-holders and inhabitants. 

The Indians are supposed to number some thirty or forty thousand 
souls, and are scatterea over the entire Province. Excepting ^e Dig- 
gers, the Utahs, the Snakes, and those residing in the vicinity of the 
Sierra Nevada and the Tlameth Mountains, they are quite similar in 
character and condition to those noticed as being residents of the Oila 
and adjacent regions. 

They are mild and timorous, and incapable of opposing any very se- 
rious impediment to the progress of settlements. Fifteen Americans, 
armed with good rifles, arc equal to one or two hundred of such ene- 
mies in ordinary cases. 

The Catholics have twenty or more missions smong them, the eflect 
of which has been not so much to advance their civilization, or convert 
them to the truths of Christianity, as to render them the slaves of a ccdr- 
rupt and vicious priesthood. 

Monterey is the present capital of Upper California. It is beautifully 
situated upon a gently undulating plain, in full view of the Ocean and 
harbor, and contains about one thousand inhabitants. Its houses are 
constructed of adobies, after the Mexican fashion. 

South of this town are several other places of considerable impor- 
tance along the coast, viz : San Diego, San Gabriel, snd San Barbara ; 
all of which are well located for commercial purposes. 

A town called the Pueblo is situated upon a small river that debouches 
between San Diego and San Gabriel. This town is a few miles removed 
from the coast, and is said to be the largest one in California. It contains 
a population of about fifteen hundred, and is the grand centripot of over- 
land intercourse with New Mexico. 

Above Monterey are two other towns, bearing the names of Sonoma and 
tian Francisco» 




KcxiCAn InDiAKs. — iVf* S48.' 



> X k. ^ 



^ t. * to 



• • 



^H 



WHAT THE BESULT WHX B& 249 

The latter is situated upon the bay of that name* and, from its superior 
commercial advantages, is destined to become one of the largest and most 
important business cities upon the western coast of the American conti- 
nent. Possessed of one of the finest and most commodious harbors in Uie 
world, (emphatically the harbor of harbors,) and located at the mouth of 
a large navigable river, that waters a vast expanse of country unsurpass* 
ed in fertility, what should hinder it from assuming that commanding po- 
sition designed for it by nature ? 

It is built after the English manner, and its inhabitants, numbering 
about two hundred, are principally American, English, and French, with 
a few Mexicans and Indians. 

There are also several settlements upon the Sacramento and other 
rivers, consisting mostly of foreigners. 

The Catholic missions are generally the nucleus of small Mexican and 
Indian villages, and derive their support from agricultural pursuits. 

Aside from these, the country is entirely devoid of population other than 
wild beasts and uncultivated savages. The white inhabitants are com* 
puted at one thousand or more, and are generally Americans ; while be- 
tween ten and twelve thousand Mexicans curse the country with their 
presence, and disgrace the Edens they possess. 

The government of California has been, like all Mexican governments, 
very lax and inefficient It was but little other than a despotism, or, ra- 
ther, a complicated machine for the oppression of the people and the perver^ 
sion cf justice t and infinitely worse than none. 

Whether the late revolution has produced a better order of things re- 
mains to be determined ; but, one fact is worthy of notice — ^no permment 
reformation can be efiTected so lon^ as Mexicans exercise any controlling 
influence in the administration of the laws ; and, to speak plainly, not un- 
til the government is placed in other and better hands. 

The Mexicans occupy eight military stations at different points along 
the coast, garrisoned by about three hundred and fifty soldiere, and mount- 
ing some fifty pieces of artillery. The largest of these fortifications is at 
Monterev. This post is garrisoned by two hundred soldiers, and twelve 
pieces or canon — while the fort at New Helvetia, held hy (he Americans^ 
mounts an equal number. 

In case of an emergency, it is supposed the whole Mexican force might 
possibly amount to between ten and eleven hundred men — ^in efficiency 
nearly equal to a party of one hundred and fifty well-armed Americans. 

It will be seen nt a mere glance, that Mexico cannot maintain her hold 
upon California for many years to come. Emigrants from the United States 
And other countries, attracted by its fertile sou and healthful climate, will 
continue to pour into it with increased ratio, until, bv outnumbering the 
^graded race that at present bears sway, this delightful portion of the globe 
•hall of necessity become either the dependency of some forei^ power or 
Sflsome a separate and distinct existence as an independent naUon. 



250 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

VisHon at THntah.— -Adventures of & trapping party.— The Munchies, or whits lodi- 
ans ; some account of them. — Amusements at rendezvou. — ^Mysterious city, and 
attempts at its exploration,— speculation relative to its inhahitaats. — Leftve fior Fort 
Hall.— Camp at JBear river.— Boundary between the U. States, and Menco.-— 
Green valleys, &c.— Country en route.— Brown*8-hole.—GeokKpcal observataons.— 
Soda, Beer, and Steamboat springs ; their peculiarities. — MineralB. — ^Valley of Bear 
river ; its fertility, timber, and abundaaoe of wild frait — ^Buiblo beirias — Superior 
advantages of this section. — ^Mineral tar. 

Our stay at the Uintah was prolonged for some ten days. The genHe- 
man in charge at this post spared no pains to render my visit agreeable, 
and, in answer to enquiries, cheerfully imparted all the information in his 
possession relative to the localities, geography, and condition of the bvd- 
lounding country. 

A trapping party from the Gila came in soon after our arrival, bringing 
with tliem a rich quantity of beaver, which they had caught during the pre- 
ceding winter, spring, and summer upon the affluents of that river and Ihe 
adjacent mountain streams. They had made a successful hunt, and give 
a glowing description of the country visited, and the general fmndlinear of 
il9 inhabitants. ^ ^ . ^ 

The natives, in some parts of their range, had ifflffii^jfme seen a white 
man, and, after the first surprise had subsided;^ treated tbm'with great de- 
ference and respect. These simple and hospitable peoj^ supplied ?tbem 
with com, beans, and melons, and seemed at all times well disposed, r 

The only difficulty encountered with them took place uprai one ^ tho 
northern tributaries of the Gila. Two or three butcher-knives ands other 
little articles being missing from camp, the trappers at once accused ^ 
Indians of stealing, and demanded their prompt restoration. The datter 
they were either unable or unwilling to do, and thereupon a volley of riSerf 
was discharged among, the promiscuous throng, with fatal eflect. Several 
were killed and others wounded, and the whole troop of timoroas savages 
immediately took to their heels, nor dared to return again. 

In narrating the events of their long excursion,, an account was given of 
visiting the JViunchies, a tribe of white Indians. 

What added much to the interest I felt in this part of their story, was the 
recollection of an article which went the newspaper rounds several years 
since, stating the existence of such a tribe. I had disbelieved it at the time; 
but this, and subsequent corroborative evidence, has efiectually remoived from 
my mind all doubts upon the subject 

Our trappers had remained with the Munchies for four weeks, and spoke 
of them in high terms. 

In reference to theii color they were represented as being of a vnft^ 
fiiirer complexion than Europeans generally, a thing easily explaineit^trwe 
Bemember this one fact, i. e., my mformants must have spc^eiLjtAipaii- 



/ 



WHITE INDIANS. 251 

tively, tftkiiig themeelves as the true representatives of that race, when in 
rraJity their own color, by constant exposure to the weather, had acquired 
a much darker hue than ordinary ; then drawing their conclusions from a 
^se standard, they were led to pronounce the fiur natives much fairer, as 
a body, than the whites. 

By ijnformation derived from various sources, I am enabled to present the 
Mowinff statement relative to this interesting people : 

The Munchies are a nation of white abonginest actually existing in a 
valley among the Sierra de los Mimbros chain, upon one of the affluents of 
the Gila, in the extreme northwestern part of the Province of Sonera. 

They number about eight hundred in all. Their country is su rounded 
by' lofty mountains at nearly every point, and is well watered and very fer- 
tile, though of limited extent Their dwellings are spacious apartments 
nicely excavated in the hill-sides, and are frequently cut in the solid 
rock. 

They subsist by agriculture, and raise cattle, horses, and sheep. Their 
features correspond with those of Europeans, though with a complexion, 
perhaps, somewhat fairer, and a form equally if not more graceful. 

Among them are many of the arts and comforts of civilized life. They 
spin aid weave, and manufacture butter and cheese, with many of the lux- 
ihries known to more enlightened nations. 

Their political economy, though much after the patriarchal order, is purely 
icpublican in its character. The old men exercise the supreme control in 
the enactment and execution of laws. These laws are usually of the most 
simple form, and tend to promote the general welfare of the community. 
Tljey are made by a concurrent majority of the seniors in council, — each 
mfde Individual, over a specified age, being allowed a voice and a vote. 

Questions o£ right and wrong are heard and adjudged by a committee 
selected from tlie council of seniors, who are likewise empowered to redress 
the injured and pass sentence upon the criminal. 

In morals they are represented as honest and virtuous. In religion they 
diiler but little from other Indians. 

TJ|ey are strictly men of peace, and never go to war, nor even, as a com- 
mon uiing, oppose resistance to the hostile mcursions of surrounding na- 
tbns. On the appearance of an enemy, they immediately retreat, with their 
Cftttle, horses, sheep, and other valuables, to mountain caverns, fitted at all 
times for their reception, — where, by barricading the entrances, they are at 
once secure without a resort to arms. 

In regard to their origin they have lost all knowledge or even tradition, 
(a thing not likely to have happened had they been the progeny of Europeans 
at any late period, — that is, smce the time of Columbus ;) neither do tlieir 
characters, manners, customs, arts, or government savor of modern Eu 

^ Cou)l a colony or party of Europeans in the short period of three centu- 
ries and a half lose all trace of their origin, religion, habits, arts, civilization, 
tnd govilmmraxt 7 Who, for a moment, would entertain an idea so estrahged 
iDprobaMUtv? 

And yratBe Mimchies cannot be real Indians, — ^they must be of Euro- 
(Wa destivity though circumstances other than complexion aflbrd no evi- 



252 THE MYSTERIOUS GTIT. 

• 

dence of identity with either nee. Where, then, shall we place them t— 
from whence is there origin ? 

We are forced to admit the weight of circumstantial testimony as to 
their having settled upon this continent prior to its discovery by Columbus* 
HeFR we are led to inquire, are they not the remote descendants of some 
colony of ancient Romans ? 

That such colonies did here exist in former ages, there is good reason 
for believing. The great lapse of time and other operative causes combined, 
may have transformeid the Munchies from the habits, customs, character, 
religion, arts, civilization, and language of the Romans, to the condition in 
which they are at present found. 

Among the visitors at the Fort were several pld trappers who had passed 
fifteen or twenty years in the Rocky Mountains and neighboring countries^ 
They were what might, with propriety, be termed " hard cases. 

The interval of their stay was occupied in gambling, horse-racing, and 
other like amusements. 

Bets were freely made upon eveiything involving the least doubt, — some* 
times to the amount of five hundred or a thousand doUars-^the stakes con- 
sisting of beaver, horses, traps, &.c. 

Not unfrequently the proceeds of months of toil, sufiering, deprivatioDi 
and danger, were dissipated in a few hours, and the unfortunate gamester 
left without beaver, horse, trap, or even a gun. In such cases Siey boie 
their reverses without grumbling, and relinquished all to the winner, as mh 
concernedly as though these were affairs of every-day occurrence. 

These veterans of the mountains were very communicative, and fond of 
relating their adventures, many of which were so vested with the marvel* 
ous as to involve in doubt their credibility. 

Were it not for extending the limits of this work too far, I should be 
tempted to transcribe the choicest of them for the reader's amusement; bot, 
as it is, I cannot refuse place to one (here for the first time related in nrf 
hearing, which has subsequently reached me fh>m other sources) relative 
to a subject deeply interesting to the curious. 

Stevens, in his " Incidents of Travel in Yucatan," admits it to be quite 
possible that cities like those in ruins at Uxmal and Palenque, may yet 
exist in the unexplored parts of the Mexican Republic, and be inhabited by 
a people in all respects similar to that once occupying the before named. 

Those acquainted with the nature of the counti^^ embraced in the moun- 
tainous portions of Mexico, must admit the possibility of such a thing. 
With this premise I ^ve, the story as I heard it 

Five or six years since, a party of trappers, in search for beaver, penetrated 
mto an unfrequented part of the mountains forming the eastern boundaiy 
of Sonora. 

During their excursion they ascended a lofty peak that overlooked an ez? 
tensive valley, apparently enclosed upon all sidee by impassable moimtaiiie* 
At a long distance down the valley, hj aid of a spy-jrlass, they covU 
plunly distinguish houses and people, with eveiy indicatum of a popakmf 
city. 

At the poiitf. from whence this discovery was made, the mountaiiHW 



1 



ITS iNHABITAirre, WHO ? 253 

facing the valley was a precipitous wall of vertical rock, several hundred 
feet to its base, rendering a descent impossible. 

After trying at other places, with uke ill-success, they were at length 
compelled to relinquish the design of further investigation for the time 
being. 

Subsequently, on visiting Arispie, a town of Sonora, several foreigners 
were induced to join them m a return expedition, and a company of some 
twenty or twenty-five repaired to the place for the purpose of prosecuting 
a research so interesting. 

On arriving at the mountain from whence the object of their curiosity 
had been first seen, there lay before them the valley and city with its domes 
and palaces, amid which a swarming population was distinctly observed, 
apparently eilgaged in the prosecution of their various avocations. There 
could be no doubt of its reality, but how to reach it was the next question. 
A number of days were occupied in vain search for a pass into the val- 
ley. The creek upon which it lay was found to emerge from the vast 
enclosure, through the mountain, by a frightful chasm formed of vertical 
rocks upon each side, for hundreds and even thousands of feet'in altitude. 
The current was rapid, and interrupted by frequent falls that precluded thd 
possibility of a passage up its bed. They crossed it, and, finding a con« 
venient slope, again ascended the mountain. 

Oil reaching the summit, a counterscarp was observed, where, by dint 
of great exertion, a descent could be effected ; but not with horses. 

Arrangements were made accordingly, and one half of the party remained 
with the animals and baggage, while the others, continuing the exploration, 
finally succeeded in entering the valley.' 

Meanwhile, the movements of the advancing party were viewed with 
great anxiety by those in reserve. In the course ot the succeeding day 
they were seen to enter the city and mingle among its inhabitants ; but, 
after that, they were never again seen or heard of. 

Three weeks elapsed and no sign of them appeared. At length their 
companions were forced by hunger to leave the spot and abandon them to 
their fate. 

Another attempt to explore this mysterious locality is reported to have 
been made by a company of Spaniards, some of whom penetrated the val- 
ley, but never returned. 

The site of this city, if the story of its existence be true, is undoubtedly 
the bed of an ancient lake, whose waters have become gradually drained 
by a forced passage through the mountain, thus forming the chasm and 
creek above noticed. 

The people inhabiting it are probably from the stock of original Mexicans,* 
who sought this as a secure retreat from the terror of Spanish oppressioa 

* Baron Humboldt and some other travellers speak of qnite extensive ruins in tHe 
vicinity of the Gila, which are attributed to a different race of people from those 
now inluibitin^ that country, or even the ancient Mexicans. Some of them are rep- 
resented as bemg in a tolerable state of preservation, particularly one, which is knows 
as the " cassa grand." No reasonable conjecture as to tlieir origin has yet been ad- 
duced. If they ani not the ruined fabrics of ancient Mexican grandeur, to whom 
are we to looli for their parentage \ 

The diversity of character bBtween them and those of Uxmal, Ftalenque, tod othet 



254 A mmAITURE OCEAN. 

in the time of Cortez; since which their posterity have lived here unknown 
to the rest of the world. 

Taught by the bitter experience of past ages to hate and distrust the 
white man, and still cherishing their traditionary animosity, they permit 
R' »ne of that race to return who visit them, and, from the peculiarity of 
llieir position and jealous caution, have successfully maintained an uaiuter- 
ruptea in cog. 

Several trappers rendezvoused at the Uintah being about to leave for 
Fort Hall, on the head waters of the Columbia river, I improved the oppor- 
tunity of bearing them company. 

My necessary arrangements were completed simply by exchanging horses; 
and, on the mommg of Oct 29th, I bade farewell to my new acquaintances 
at the Fort, and jomed the party en route, which, including inyselt and 
i:ompagnons de voyage from Fort Lancaster, numbered eleven in all, well 
mounted and armed. 

The weather proved delightful considering the lateness of the season, 
and our journey was rapid and uninterrupted. 

On leaving the Uintah we continued northward, over a rough country, for 
some twenty-five miles, and passed the night at Ashley's Fork,''' witli a 
email village of Snake Indians. 

Resuming our course through a mountainous region, diversified by beaati- 
ful little vaUeys, late in the atternoon of the third day we camped in the 
vicinity of Brown's-hole. 

Bearing from thence a southwesterly course, two days afterwards we 
arrived at Bear river, and obtained, from an adjoining eminence, a distant 
view of the Great Salt Lake. 

ContinuinfiT down the river a few miles, we struck camp, and remained 
$ome three days for the purpose of hunting. 

Being unwilling to leave the vicinity wiuiout a more perfect observation 
. of this vast inland sea, I improved the interval for that purpose, and, in a 
few hours' ride, came to a point which overlooked its briny waters and 
spread out before me an object of so much interest to all beholders. 

Its whilom waves now lay slumbering upon its bosom, for not a breath 
of air stirred to awake them from their transient repose, save that caused 

rained cides of Central America, puzzles us still more ; and, as the feeble ray of con- 
jecture is the only Bource from whence light may be thrown upon thia mysteriooa sub- 
ject, we would prefer the suggestion, that the progenitors of the Munchies, or white 
Indians, might have been their builders ; or, if^ the reported existence of the city of 
the mountains as stated in the text be true, might not the ancestors of the people now in- 
habiting it have had some hand in their original construction ? But, it the latter be 
the case, and these relics are not the product of Mexican civilization, tiie qne^w 
yet remains unanswered, viz : who are the residents of that city and whence is 
their origin! « 

* This stream is named in memory of Gen. Ashley, of Mo., who, while engaged ia 
the fur trade, attempted to descend the Colorado in boats, thinking thus to reach St. 
Louis by a direct virater communication ! However, he was compelled to relinq[uish 
his strange enterprise at the mouth of this creek, on account of the difficiilqr ao^ 
«langer attendant upon a further progress. 



GRANDUER AI9D LOVELINESS. 3M 

by the flutterings of countless water-fowls which beskimmed the ciystal 
blue or rode upon its surface. 

No sound disturbed the stillness of its solitude, save that of my own 
footsteps commingling with the incessant chatter of aquatic Inrds. In 
solemn grandeur it lay before the eye a desert of waters, bounded upon 
three sides by the curving horizon, while from the fourth a beautiful ex- 
panse of verdancy smiled upon its solitude. 

The island with its lone mountain, of which I have spoken in a former 
chapter, arose in full view, apparently a short distance to tlie southwest 
It was a grand and imposing spectacle, and I much regretted the impossi- 
bility of reaching it Its giant piles of naked rock and sun-baked clay, 
seemed scanning the surrounding waves, to smile upon their soft blandish- 
ments or frown at their rudeness. 

But the Island, the Lake, and the country contiguous, have been fully 
described in former pages, which of right precludes a further notice at thia 
time. 

On resuming our course we continued up Bear river to tlie famous min- 
eral springs, — ^thence bearing a northwesterly direction, we arrived at Fort 
Hall late in the afternoon of Nov. 9th. 

The route from Uintah to this point presents many interesting localities 
some of which call for more than a mere passing notice. That situate 
upon Green river, known as Brown's-hole,* coming Urst in order, seems 
to assert a merited precedence. 

Descending by a steep, difficult pass &om the west, fifty miles north of 
Ashley's Fork, the traveller is ushered into a beautiful valley, some fifteen 
Diiles long by ten broad, shut in upon ail sides by impassable mountains 

* This locality has received the soubriquet of Brown's-hole from the following dr- 
zmnstance : 

Some six or seven years since, a trapper, by the name of Brown, came to it in the 
611 season for the purpose of hunting in its vicinity. During bis stay a fiiU of snow 
dosed the passes eo e^ctually, he was forced to remain tUl the succeeding spring 
before he could escape from his lonely prison. 

h was formerly a uivorite resort for the Snake Indians, on account of its exhaust- 
less stores of game and wild fruits, as well as its security from the approach of ene- 
nies. 

1*1 OTE. — Taking latitude 4S? north as the northern boundary between Oregon and 
California, these interesting regions of country are embraced within the limits of the latf- 
ter; but taking the head- waters of the Arkansas as the true point, and thence, by a 
line running due west to the Pacific, nearly the whole of it will be found within the 
United States. 

The treaty with Spain in 1819, defining this boundary, which was subsequently 
eoofinned by Mexico, after noting Red river &s the northern boundary of its eastern 
provinces, to longitude 100^ westfro^ Greenwich, and thence north to the Arkansaa, 
uses the following words : 

** Thence, foUowmg the couise of the south bonk of the Arkansas to its souftcx, 
m latitude ^^ north, thence by that parallel of latitude to the South Sea." 

IT the source of Uie Arkansas, by its south bank, is in lat. 43^ north, then the mal> 
ter of boundary admits of no question ; but if it is not in that parallel of latitudey 
should the latter be regarded as the true boundary, when it is evident, from the words 
of the treaty tliat the source of the Arkansas by its south bank, was the intended 



206 Yicmmr of be^ir river. 

dMt ^aid it fifom the world without The only feasible entrance is 
upon the east side tliroush a remarkable canon sixty yards wide, fomedby 
craggy rocks six or ei^ht hundred feet in altitude, succeeded by a still 
narrower and more precipitous one, towering to a height of twelve or fifteen 

hundred feet 

This valley is intersected by Green river, which, emerging from the lofty 
ridges above, and tracing its way through the narrow and frightful canons 
below, here presents a broad, smooth stream, fifty or sixty yards wide, with 
doping blinks, and passablv well timbered. 

Here all the various wild fruits indigenous to the country are found in 
mat abundance, with countless multitudes of deer, elk, and sheep. 

The soil is of a dark loam, very fertile and admirably adapted to cultiva- 
tion. Vegetation attains a rank growth and continues green the entire 

year. 

Spring wedded to summer seems to have chosen this sequestered spot 
for her fixed habitation, where, when dying autumn woos the sere frost aod 
snow, of winter she may withdraw to her fiower-garnished retreat and 
■mile and bloom forever. 

The surrounding mountains are from fifteen hundred to two thousand 
feet high, and present several peaks where snow claims an unyielding do- 
minion year after year, in awful contrast with the beauty and lovcluiess 
that lies below. 

Few localities in the mountains are equal to this, in point of beautiful and 
romantic scenery. Every thing embraced in its confines tends to inspire 
the beholder with commingled feeling of awe and admiration. 

Its long, narrow gate-way, walled in by huge impending rocks, for hun- 
dreds of feet in altitude, — ^the lofty peaks that surround it, clothed in eternal 
snow, — ^the bold stream traversing it, whose heaving bosom pours sweet 
music into the ears of listening solitude, — ^the verdant lawn, spreading far 
and wide, garnished with blushinfi^ wild-flowers and arrayed in the habili- 
ments of perennial spring,— all, all combine to invest it with an enchant- 
ment as soul-expanding in its sublimity as it is fascinating in its loveliness. 

The country contiguous to Bear river, backfix>m the valleys, is generally 
rugged and sterile. Sometimes the surface for a considerable extent is 
entirely destitute of vegetation, and presents a dreary waste of roclcs, or clay 
hardened to a stone-like consistency by the sun^s rays. Now and then a 
few dwarfish pines and cedars meet the eye amid the surrounding desola- 
tion, and occasional clusters of coarse grass intervene at favoring depres- 
sions among the rocks. 

rARTHKST northern extremity of Mexico, where the line between the two countriei 
shall commence, and thence ran due west to the Pacific ? 

But, instead of bemg in lat. 42^ north, the source of the Arkansas is in lat 99^ 
north, as indisputably ascertained from recent explorations, and thus an interval of 
three decrees occurs between the two points named in the above treaty ! 

If the iJnited Suites are obligated by this treaty to receive the 4SIA. degicse as tl^ir 
aoathem boundary, Mexico is equally obligated to receive the parallel from thesonroo 
cf the Arkansas due west lo the Pacific, as her true northern limits ; thus, a tenitovV 
if eteven hundred and twenty-five miles from east to west, and nearly one huoditi 

' fiirtY from north to south, is left unowned by either party! 



THE BUFFALaBEBRY. 257 

The landscape, as a whole, possesses a savage wildness peculiar to itself^ 
and bears strong indications of volcanic action. The mountains are not 
BO high as those of other parts, but are far more forbidding in their aspect. 
The prevailing rock is lava, scoriated basalt, trap, bituminous limestone, 
and calcareous tufa. 

The valley of Bear river aflbrds a number of springs strongly impreg- 
nated with various mineral properties, which cannot fail to excite tlie curi- 
osity and interest of the traveller. They are found upon the left bank of 
the stream, a short distance below a small affluent from the north. 

Two of them are situated in a small grove of cedars, within a short dis« 
tance of each other. 

In passing their vicinity the attention of the traveller is at once arrested 
by the hissing noise they emit ; and on approaching to ascertain the cause, 
he finds two circular-shaped openings in the surface, several feet in diame- 
ter, and filled with transparent fluid in a state of incessant eflervescence, 
caused by the action of subterranean gases. 

The water of the one he finds on tasting to be excellent naturcU soda^ and 
that of the other, slightly sicid and beer-like ; — ^the draught will prove deli- 
cious and somewhat stimulating, but, if repeated too freely, it is said to pro- 
duce a kind of giddiness like intoxication. These singular natural curios- 
ities are known among the trappers as the Beer and Soda springs, names 
fiot altogether inappropriate. 

A few hundred yarcLs below these, is another remarkable curiosity, called 
the Steamboat spring. Tliis discharges a column of mineral water from a 
rock-formed orifice, accompanied with subterraneous sounds like those pro- 
duced by a high-pressure steamboat 

Besides the above-described, there are a number of others in this vicinity 
of equally mineral character, as well as several hot springs, varying in tem- 
perature from blood to that of extreme boiling heat 

Bear river valley contains many wide spreads of most excellent land, 
susceptible of a high state of cultivation. In fertility it is unsurpassed, and 
varies in width from one and a half to three miles. 

The stream is not heavily timbered, but the scattering groves of pine and 
cedar among the adjoining mountains partially atone for any apparent defi- 
ciency. 

Towards its head, the hills upon either side are less rugged and barren, 
and present more frequent intervals of verdancy. 

I noticed a large number of fruit-bearing snrubs and bushes, including 
cherry, service, goose, and buffiilo-berries, (two kinds,) with currants. 

The bushes of the bufi&Io-berry were not as yet entirely divested of thei 
delicious burthen, and afibrded a new variety of that fruil hitherto not havip 
come under my observation. 

This berry is about the size of and similar in shape to the common currant. 
There are three kinds, — the white, yellow, and red, (shepherdia argenlia.) 

The red is of a slightly tartish taste, but not unpleasant ; the yellow is 
somewhat less acid, but otherwise similar to the red ; the white, however, 
is most excellent tasted, and possesses a delicious sweetness which causes 
it to be highly relished. 

This fruit has several small seeds in it, like those of the whortleberrv^ 
uid grows upon a bush in shape and size quite like the common shrub-oaic* 

22* 



258 FORT HALL, ETC. 

It produces in such immense quantities, that the parent bush is not mifre- 
qaently flattened with its superincumbent weight. 

The grizzly bear delights to revel among the thickets of this his favorite 
berry, and is almost certain to make from it his last autumn meal ere he re- 
tires to winter quarters and commences the long fast that follows. 

The valley of Bear river presents to emigrants many advantages. Pos- 
sessed not only of a rich soil, well adapted to cultivation, and vast mineral 
resources, with natural curiosities that must ever make it a central point of 
attraction, but situated in the immediate vicinity of the prospective popula- 
tion of the Great Salt Lake and upon the the direct line of over-land inter- 
course between the United States, California, and Oregon, it must command 
for its future inhabitants a sure source of prosperity and wealth. 

There is little doubt of its eventually becoming the most impcHtant sec- 
tion of Southeastern Oregon. 

In descanting upon tlie natural curiosities of this valley, the trappers ac*- 
companying me spoke of a spring further to the northward, which constantly 
emits a small stream of mineral tar, from the mountain-side, in no respect 
inferior to the manufactured article. However, I am not certain in regard 
to the locality of this interesting phenomenon. 



CHAPTER XXV. 



Fort Hall ; its history, and locality. — ^Information relative to Oregon. — ^Boundaries 
and<(«xtent of the territory. — ^Its rivers and lakes, with a concise description of them 
severally. — Abundance and variety of fish and water-fowl. — Harbors and islands.— 
Oregon as a wliole ; its mountains and geographical divisions. — Eastern Divi^n ; 
its wild scenery, valleys, soil, and timber ; volcanic ravages ; country between 
Clarke's river and the Columbia. — ^Nortb of the Columbia; its general character.— 
Middle Division ; its valleys, prairies, highlands, and forests. — ^Western Division ; 
a beautiful country ; extensive valleys of extraordinary fertility ; productive plains ; 
abundance of timber, its astonishing size and variety. — ^A brief summary of facts. 

Our journey from the Uintah to Fort Hall occupied twelve day.^, and took 
us a distance of about two hundred miles. Most of this time the we;itber 
continued mild and pleasant; the only interval of inclemency was a single 
bleak and cloudy day, succeeded by a slight fall of snow during the nigiit, 
which the bright sunshine of the ensuing morning dissipated in a few mo- 
ments. 

Along the entire route we found an abundance of green grass at sheltered 
places in the valleys, and also large quantities of game, especially black- 
tailed deer, bear, and elk. Bear are more numerous in this section than iu 
any other I am acquainted with. 

Fort Hall is located upon the left bank of Snake river, or Lewis' ForK of 
the Columbia, in a rich lx)ttom near the delta formed by the confluence of 
the Portneuf with that stream, in lat. 43^ KT 30" north, long. 112^ 20" 
64 west. 



PICTURE OF OREGON AS IT IS. 269 

In general structure it corresponds with most of the other trading estab- 
lishments in the country. It was huilt by Capt Wythe of Boston, in 1832, 
for the purpose of furnishing trappers with their needful supplies in ex- 
change for beaver and other peltries, and also to command the trade witli 
the Snakes. Subsequently it was transferred to the Hudson Bay Company 
in whose possession it lias since remained. 

Mr. Grant, a gentleman distinguished for his kindness and urbanity, is at 
present in charge, and has some sixty Canadians and half-breeds in his em- 
ploy. 

This post is in the immediate vicinity of the old war-ground between the 
Blackfoot, Snake, and Crow Indians, and was formerly considered a very 
dangerous locality on that account. Its early occupants were subject to 
frequent losses from the hostile incursions of the former of these tribes, and 
on two or three occasions came very near being burnt out * by their un- 
sparing enemies. 

The country in the neighborhood of Fort Hall affords several extensive 
Viilleys upon the Snake river and its tributaries, which are rich, well tim- 
timbered, and admirably adapted to the growth of grain and vegetables. 

The adjoining prairies also, to some extent, possess a tolerable soil, and 
abound in a choice variety of grasses. Back from tlie valleys and plains, 
the landscape is extremely rugged and mountainous, poorly timbered, and 
bears the character of general sterility. 

My stay at the Fort brought me in contact with gentlemen from various 
parts of Oregon, who kindly imparted to me all the information in thrnr 
possession relative to the nature and true condition of this interesting and 
highly important section of our national domain. With the data thus ob- 
tained, assisted by subsequent personal observation and intelligence derived 
from other sources, I am enabled to arrange the following brief outlines of 
its geography, geology, climate, and soil, including a description of its pro- 
ductions, inhabitants, natural advantages, inducements to emigrants, ox., 
which the reader may rely upon as strictly correct in every essential par- 
ticular. 

With the northern extremity of Bear river valley, the traveller enters the 
southeastern limits of Oregon Territory. By referring to the map 
it will be seen that this country is bounded upon the north f by the British 
and Russian postecssions, east by the Rocky Mountains, south by Upper 
California, and west by the Pacific, It is not my present purpose to argue, 
or endeavor to sustain, the claims of our Government to tlie wliole area em- 
braced in tiie above ; but conceiving the matter now settled, I shall proceed 
to the task in in hand without further preliminary. 

Oregon, like California, is possessed of many important rivers and har- 

• A portion of the Fort wa« formeply constructed of wood ; — it is now built of 
''adobies" like other trading establishments of the country. 

t The treaty now in process of negotiation with Great Britain, relinquishes to that 
government ali above the 49th deg., and consequently admits its claims to the entiiis 
norUiem boundary, to wit : from 49^ to the Russian possessions. 



2e0 ALL ABOUT THE COLUMBU RIVER. 

bon, that, coosideringr their intimate relation to the general interest of com- 
merce, seem to demand our first attention. 

The Columbia and its branches water almost the entire territory, -And 
open a highway from the ocean to tlie lofty mountain ranges whicii toi ui luj 
eastern boundary. This river heads in lat. 52^ north, long. 119^ west iro;n 
Greenwich, and, after pursuing a serpentine course for fifteen hundred or 
two thousand miles, finds its discharge in the Pacific, at lat 46° north. 

One hundred and twenty miles ot this distance are navigable for ships 
of the largest class, but the remainder of its course is interrupted by occa* 
sional rapids and falls, that render frequent portajres necessary. 

The upper and lower '* dalls" and ^ cascades, present the must serious 
impediments to navigation. The former of these, situated above Clarke's 
Fork, are caused by the passage of the Columbia through immense ledges, 
that leave huge vertical walls of basaltic rock upon either side, and com- 
press its waters to a narrow, chasm-Uke channel. There, dashing and 
foaming in wild fury, the torrent rushes past its lateral dikes with frightful 
velocity. 

The distance between these two **• dalis" is some thirty miles. 

The ^< cascades " lie at the base of a mountain range of the same name, 
one hundred and fifty miles from the Ocean. Near this place the whole 
stream is plunged over a precipice of fifty feet descent, forming a sublime 
and magnificent spectacle. 

Between the dalis and cascades, a reach of high-lands, formed almost en- 
tirely of naked basalt, presents another barrier, through which the river 
forces itself by a tunnel-like pass for ten or fifteen miles, leaving vast mural 
piles upon the right and left, that attain an altitude of three hundred and 
fifty or four hundred feet. 

A few miles above tlie junction of the southern and middle forks of the 
Columbia, two considerable lakes have been formed by the compressure of 
its waters among tlie adjoining mountains. 

The first of these is about twenty miles long and six broad, shut in by 
high, towering hills, covered with stately pine forests. 

Emerging IVom tliis, the river urges its way through lofty embankments 
of volcanic rock for some five miles or more, when a second lake is formed 
in a similar manner, which is about twenty-five miles in length and six in 
widtli. 

Note. — Capt. Fremont, in speaking of the Columbia, makes use of the following 
just ubticrvaiions : 

" The Columbia is the only river which traverses the whole breadth of the country, 
breaking through all the ranges, and entering into the sea. Drawing its watQrs Irom 
a section of ten degrees of latitude in the Rocky Mountains, which are collected 
into one stream b/ ihree main forks (Lewis', Clarke's, and the North Fork) near the 
centre of the Oregon vallev, this great river thence proceeds by a single channel into 
the sea, while its three forks lead each to a pass in the mountains, which opens the 
wav into the interior of the continent 

"This fact, in reference to the rivers of this region, gives an immense value to the 
Columbia. Its mouth is the only inlet and outlet to and from the sea ; its three forks 
lead to oasses in the mountains ; it is, therefore, the only Une of communication be- 
tween the Pu-cific and the interior of Morth America ; and all operations of war oi 
camnerce, of national or social intercourse, must be conducted upon iL" 



OTHER RIVERS OF THE TERRTTORT. ^1 

There are also several other lakes, of greater or leas extent, at diflerent 
points along its course. 

Perhaps no river in the world, of the same length, affi>rd8 such varied 
and picturesque scenery as does the Columbia. 

Its lakes, tunnels, cascades, falls, mountains, rocky embankments, prairies, 
plains, bottoms, meadows, and islands, disclose an agreeable medley of wild 
romance, solemn grandeur, and pleasing beauty, far surpassing that of any 
other country. 

During its course it receives numerous tributaries, the most important of 
which are the Clarke, Flat-bow, Spokan, Okanagan, Snake, Yakama, Piscous, 
Entvatecoom, Umatilla, Quisnel, John Day, D'Chnte, Cathlatates, Walla- 
walla, Wallammette^ and Cawlitz. 

The Clarke, Snake, and Wallammette rivers, seem to call for more than 
a bare allusion. 

The former of these rises in the Rocky Mountains, near lat. 46^ north, and 
following its windings, is about five hundred and fifty miles in length. A 
lake, some thirty miles long and eight broad, is also formed in its course, 
about one hundred miles oSoyb its mouth. During its windings it receives 
a large number of affluents, which unite to swell the volume of its waters 
to the full size of its parent stream. 

The Snake, or Lewis' Fork, is equally important. It rises in lat 42® 
north, and, pursuing a northwesterly direction for five hundred miles, is 
discharged into the Columbia, at lat. 46^ north. This river also receives 
several tributaries, the largest of which are the Kooskooskie and Salmon. 

The Wallamette heads in the Cascade Mountains, in Upper California, 
near lat 41® north, and bears a northerly course for nearly three hundred 
and fifty miles. One hundred and twenty-five miles of this distance are 
navigable for boats of a light draught 

Several tributaries, both from Uie east and west, unite to increase its 
magnitude and enhance its importanea 

The Umpqua, which is the next river worthy of notice below the Colum- 
bia, has its source in the Cascade Mountains, near lat. 43® north, and run- 
ning westerly for almost three hundred miles, is finally discharged into the 
Pacific. Some forty or fifty miles of this distance are said to be navigable. 

South of the Umpqua a stream of nearly equal size empties into the Pa- 
cific, called Rogue's river. This also rises in the Cascade Mountains, ai 
lat 42® north, and is said to be navigable for boats of a light draught, some 
seventy miles or more. 

The Chilkeelis is the first river north of the Columbia, and rises in the 
mountains, near lat 48® north. Pursuing a westeriy course, it discharges 
itself into the Pacific at Gray's Harbor, after flowing a distance of about 
two hundred and fifty miles. 

Eraser's river is tlie extreme northern one of Oregon. It heads in the 
Rocky Mountains, near lat 54® north, and empties into the Gulf of Georgia, 
at lat 49® north. In its course it receives several large tributaries, and 
pursues its way for a distance of about four hundred miles, eighty of which 
are navigable. 

JBesides those above named, there are several other streams, of less mag- 
nitade, emptying into the Pacific at various points along its coast, all of 



262 HARBORS ETC, 

"which, as the country becomes settled, will contribute to the facilities of 
cooimerce and manufactures. 

The rivers of Oregon, in the abundance and quality of their fish, are 
unparalleled. At certain seasons of the year, their waters are completely 
alive with ihe countless myriads that swarm them to their very sources. 

Even the small streams are not exempt from this thronging population. 
So great is their number they are frequently taken by the hand ; and, with 
the aid of a net, several barrels may be caught at a single haul. It re- 
quires but little effort to obtain them, and large quantities are annual^ 
shipped to the Sandwich Islands and various other points. 

Firih are undoubtedly destined to furnish an important item in the future 
commerce of Oregon. At the present time they supply the principal food 
of its inhabitants, both Indians and whites. Among the difierent varieties 
abounding in these streams, salmon and salmon trout claim the precedence, 
both in numbers and qualities. 

These delicious fish attain a size seldom surpassed, and are found in 
every accessible river and creek. The bays, harbors, and mouths of rivers 
are also thronged with cod, herring, sturgeon, and occasionally whales, 
while vast quantities of oysters, clams, lobsters, &.c., may be obtained along 
the coast. 

Next to fish, in connection with the rivers, the extraordinary number of 
aquatic birds arrests the attention. These consist of geese, brants, ducks 
(of tliree or four varieties,) swans, pelicans, and gulls. * 

At certain seasons, they throng the rivers, creeks, lakes, and ponds, at 
diliferent parts, in innumerable multitudes, and not only keep the waters in 
constant turmoil from their nautic exercises and sports, but fill the air with 
the wild clamor of their incessant quackings. An expert sportsman may 
kill hundreds of t^em in a few hours. 

So abundant are they that their feathers may be obtained of tlie Indians 
in any requisite quantity, for a trifling conwitleration — in all respects equal, 
for bedding, to those procured from domes licated geese and ducks. 

In regard to harbors, the natural advantages of Oregon are not equal to 
those of California ; though, as the country becomes settled, the ingenuity 
of man will speedily atone for these apparent dcficfencies ; and if she has 
not the matchless basin of the Bay of San Francisco, she has other locali- 
ties upon her sea board that, with a small expenditure of money and eilbrt, 
may be made secure and adapted to all her commercial requirements. 

It is much to be regretted, however, that the Columbia afibrds not an 
easy and secure entrance for ships trom the Ocean, as this will undoubted- 
ly become the most important point of the whole coast. 

At present, the mouth of this river, between Points Adams and Hancock, 
is partially blocked up by large sand-bars, deposited by the current, ana 
maintained in their places through the repulsive action of the sea-waves. 

How far tliese impediments may operate to the future detriment of com- 
merce, remams to be seen. Unlesi" some remedy should be adopted, the 
liarbor of this great embryo depot of Western trade will cont'nue to oppose 
a difficult entrance. 

The estuaries of the Umpqua and Rogue rivers are more difficult of ac» 



GEOGRAPHICAL DIVISIONS. 263 

cess than the Columbia. It is even said, that there is not a good harbor on 
the coast of Oregon below lat. 46^ north. Above this parallel there are 
several, not only easy of access but secure of anchorage ; the principal of 
which are those of the Straits of Juan de Fuca and uie Gulf of Georgia. 
The islands of Vancouvre and Queen Charlotte* also possess a number of 
excellent harbors. 

These islands are large, well timbered, and generally fertile. Though, 
like the mainland, quite broken and hilly, they embrace many beautiful 
plains and lovely valleys, abounding with game, and coursed by ample 
streams of fresh water. Vancouvre's Island is two hundred and siJicty miles 
long by fifty in width, and Queen Charlotte's one hundred and forty by 
twenty-eight. In addition to the above named, there are a number of small- 
er islands near the Straits of Juan de Fuca — ^more important on account 
of their fisheries than the quality of their soil. 

The whole extent of the sea-coast, connected with the territory, (i. e.. 
from California to the Russian possessions,) is about one thousand miles, 
besides that of its various islands. Reckoning from the above data, the 
area included within its limits is not far from nine hundred and two tliou- 
sand, two hundred and fifty square miles. 

To speak of this vast country in toto, we could give no general character 
either in regard to its climate, soil, or productions, possessed, as it is, of 
every diversity, from tlie piercing frosts of perpetual winter, to the smiling 
verdancy of unfading spring — from the dwarfish herbage of the arctic re- 
gions, to the generous fruits of warmer zones — and from the barren steri- 
lity of a^Lybian desert, to the exuberant fecundity of earth's choicest gar- 
den-spots. 

However, from the numerous peaks that rear their cloud-capped heads in 
almost every direction, and the continuous ridges intersecting it from side 
to side and trom end to end, we might with safety pronouni^ it mountainous. 

The Rocky Mountains, forming its eastern boundary, branch off wester- 
ly and northwesterly at various points, and, in coimection with other ridges, 
beline the whole country. It is my present purpose merely to classify some 
the more extensive of these ranges, and note their locality, as auxiliary to 
a more accurate and compreiiensive disposal of the leading subject before 
the reader. 

The Blue Mountain chain commences not far from 45^^ 30' nortii lati- 
tude, and bears a southerly course, till it passes into California and unites 
with the intersecting ridges ol' that province. It runs nearly parallel with 
the Rocky Mountains, at an interval varyinpf from one hundred to one hun- 
dred and fifty niili:;6, forming the P'astern Division of Oregon. 

The Cascade chain (be'.ore noticed, in connection with California) com- 
mences in the Russian possossionA, and pursues a southerly course Uirough 
both countries, till it finally b ?como.'. lost in the sea-girt isthmus of the Lower 
Province. It runs parallel vviih the coast, at a distance varying from one 
hundred to one hundred and fifty uiiles, aiid defines the Western and Mid- 
dle Divisions of Orej^on. 

* By the terms of the proposed treaty, the i<4lands of Vancouvre and Qaeen Char- 
lotte are transferred to Great Biilain, leaving only a few diminutive and comparative- 
ly valueless ports in the Straits of Juan de Fuca and in islets south of Vanoouvre^ 
withiii the limits of the U. 8. territory. 



264 A BEAUTY SPOT. 

The country north of the Columbia is also traversed by numerous brunch* 
68 and spurs of the Rocky and Cascade Mountains, many of ^em present* 
infflofty peaks, covered with never-melting snow and ice. 

The mountain ranges before described, have many summits towering &r 
above the snow-line. They are generally less sterile than the main^iain 
of the Rocky Mountains, and, amid their snow-clad tops and denuded emi- 
nences, present alternate spreads of high table land and rolling prairie, 
clothed with vegetation, and aemse forests of pine, cedar, fir, and oak, or open- 
ing valleys arrayed in all the enchantment of vernal loveliness. 

The Eastern, or Southeasterly Division of Oregon, partakes of a greater 
variety of wild and savage scenery, intermixed with beauty and desolation, 
than any other section in the whole territory. 

The valleys of Bear river and those parts contiguous to Fort Hall, have 
already been described on a preceding page, and all their varied attrac- 
tions fully descanted upon. Besides these, there are other valleys in the 
neighborhood of the South Pass, upon Little and Big Sandy, and the New 
Forks of Green river, that claim a passing notice. 

The valleys last referred to are of variable width and possess a fertile 
soil, adapted to either grazing or agricultural purposes, and assume an 
additional importance from their situation in reference to Che grand routes 
from the United States to Oregon and California. They are capable of 
sustaining a small population with peculiar advantage, were it not for 
the troubles that might be anticipated from the hostile incursions of the 
Blackfeetand Sioux. 

Below Fort Hall, th^ valleys of Snake, or Lewis' river, are somewhat 
limited, but very fertile, though enclosed for the most part by denuded 
and sterile mountains. In the vicinity of Fort Boise, on the bank of 
Lewis' Fork, are several rich and extensive plains and valleys, more or 
less adapted to cultivation. 

The Koofikooskie and Salmon rivers, also, present some fine bottoms. 
Another beautiful valley is situated upon Powder river, a considerable 
creek, about forty miles below Fort Bois^. It is large and very fertile, 
but lacks a sufficiency of timber without a resort to the dense pine foresta 
of the neighboring hills. 

The next section that attracts the traveller's attention as he proceeds 
towards the Columbia, is a favored spot known as le Grand Randt bound- 
ed on all sides by mountains, in the vicinity of the Blue range. This 
locality is nearly circular, and about one hundred and fifty miles in cir- 
cumference, well watered and possesses a soil of matchless fertility.* 

* The following analyris of the Mil of this valley, u fiimished by CoL Frem<xit, 
win «ttefit its flupeiior quality : 

Silida - • • - • • * -70, 81 

Alumnia ..--.-- 10, 97 

Lime and magnesia • - • * * -1, 38 

Oxade of iron - - - • • • 2, 21 

Vegetable matter partly decomposed • • - - 8,16 

Water and iooss •••••- 5. 46 

' PhiQspbate.of lime - ... i^ 01 

100,00 



NORTHERN PART. 265 



^imber of the best kind may be procured, in any quantity, from the ad- 
joining mountains, and, to a limited extent, from the valley. 

Trappers speak of the Grand Rond with an enthusiasm which is cordi- 
ally responded to by all who have hitherto visited it. So far as soil and 
climate are concerned, a better section of country than this is rarely 
found. 

Soatheast from the place last described, sixty miles or more, lies a long 
stretch of desolate country which bears a strikingly volcanic appearance. 

This region is thickly paved with vast piles of lava and igneous rock, 
Btrown about in confused fragments, as if the mountains had been rent 
asunder and dashed in horrid medley upon the adjoining plains, and earth, 
itself, had undergone all the indescribable contorsions of more than 
agony, — now opening in frightful chasms, — now vibrating with unheard- 
of violence, oversetting hills and rooting them from their foundations by 
the impetuosity of its motion, or elevating half vertically, the immense 
'layers of subterranean rock forming the valves of distorted fissures, and 
depressing the opposing ones in frightful contrast, — ^in haste to complete 
the picture of destruction by an imposing array of wild and savage scenery. 

Numerous boiling springs are also found among these wide-spread heaps 
of ruined nature whose waters are frequently so hot that meat may be 
cooked in a very few minutes by submersion in them. 
. Several streams trace their way through this region, affording occasional 
bottoms of fertile soil and luxuriant vegetation, that smile with bewitching 
enchantment upon the relentless havoc surrounding them. 

Upon Clarke's river and its tributaries, as well as the numerous lakes 
adjacent to them, there are large quantities of excellent land, well adapted 
to agricultural and grazing purposes. The hills, too, are generally studded 
with dense forests of pine and fir, some of them of gigantic growth, while 
the intervning plateaux and high prairies present frequent intervals of 
lus^r grasses. 

The same may be said, though in a more restricted sense, of most of the 
country lying between Clarke's river and the Columbia. 

The streams of water and lakes are most of them skirted with bottoms 
and valleys of greater or less extent, tolerably well timbered, While the 
neighboring hiUs afford frequent groves of lieavy pines, diversified with 
openings of grass-clad prairies or of denuded barrenness. 

Many interesting localities lie along the Columbia, above the confluence 
of Clarke's river, as well as upon the several tributaries finding their way 
into it. A tract of country circumjacent to the Lower Lake possesses a 
rich soil, with other advantages, which in due time will command the atten- 
tion of emigrants. 

The section lying still north of this is but little better than a barren 
waste of frost and snow, with now and then choice spots of rank vegeta^ 
tion and rich floral beauty, shut up in their stern recesses, in wonderful 
contrast with the savage sublimity and wild disorder of the masses of naked 
lock that surround thoiii. 

Frasier's river has an extensive valley of excellent and well timbered 
land, skirting it in variable width, from mouth to source. The same may 
be said of many of its tributaries. The Chilkeelis, also, possesses many 
choice spots. 



266 THE WESTERN DIYISIOX. 

But, as a general thing, that portion of country north of the Colombit 
is the most worthless part of Oregon. 

A vast sliare of it is mere naked rock or deserts of ice and snow, with 
DOW and then dense forests of pine, cedar, and fir. There are, compan- 
tively, few arable prairies ; and not more than one half of the whole extent 
can be turned to any useful purpose. Perhaps one sixth of it is suscepti- 
ble of cultivation. In fiict, the only localities worthy of mention are the 
TBlleys scattered among the Claset and Cascade Mountains, and along the 
different rivers and creeks. 

The cause of this general sterility is more to be attributed to the severity 
of the climate, consequent upon a high northern latitude, combined with the 
broken and mountainous character of the country, than to any great natural 
deficiency of soil. Of course it can never become thickly populated. 

Its timber, fisheries, and facilities tor manufactures, stock-raising, and the 
ffrowth of wool, embrace its greatest inducements to emigrants ; though, 
m a commercial point of view, its extensive for trade and commodious luN^ 
bors, with other kindred advantages, should not be overlooked. 

We now come to the Middle Division, or that section south of the Co- 
Inmbia, between the Blue and Cascade Mountains. 

In this division of Oregon the face of the country is very much diversi- 
fied. As a whole, it presents a continued series of conical hiUsyhuge mas- 
ses of rock, and undulating prairies, intermixed with lofty, cloud-capped 
peaks, shooting transversely from the ridges that form its eastern and west- 
em boundaries. These mountains are usually clothed with rank vegeta* 
tion, and frequently present stately forests of valuable timber, particiuariy 
the Blue range. 

It also contains many extensive valleys of great fertility, situated amooff 
its mountains and upon the John Day, Quisnell, Umatilla, D'Chute, w 
Wallawalla rivers, and their numerous afi^uents. 

The southern extremity likewise afl&rds many fertile and extensive val* 
leys, but it is rather sparsely timbered. In the immediate vicinity of the 
Columbia, the land is sandy and barren, though back from the river, the 
hills are tolerably rich and coated with heavy pine forests. 

Nearly the whole of this section may be considered available for agricul- 
ture and stock-raising. 

The Western Division next commands our attention. Below the Cas- 
cades, the country contiguous to the Columbia presents a vast extent of 
thickly timbered and extremely fertile bottom land, one hundred and twenty 
miles wide, interspersed with frequent openings of lusty vegetation. 

The forests of this section afibrd some of me largest and most beautiful 
pine and fir trees in the world. Its valleys, plains, and hills are likewise 
possessed of a most excellent soil, adapted to every practicable use. 

Above this, and bordering upon the Straits of Juan de Fuca are also 
large tracts of fine land, weU watered, timbered, and fertile. 

Southward, towards the confines of California, the Umpqna and Rogue 
rivers claim several very extensive and fertile valleys and bottomlands. 
Upon the former of these are said to be two, one of which is forty miles in 
length by ten in width, and the other seventy by fifteen ; — upon the lattefi 
is one eighty miles long, and varying from fifteen to fifty in width. 



MAGNIFICENT FOREST TREES. 267 

Besides the above mentioned, there are nmneions other Talleys, all of 
which are well timbered and of nnparalleled fertility. 

No country in the world afibrds a better soil, or a more romantic scenery. 
The mountains bounding them rise in stately grandeur, oftentimes fiur above 
the clouds, to converse with the relentless snows of successive ages, — 
now presenting their nude sides, paved with dark masses of frowning rocks, 
or proud forests of evergreen, verdant lawns, flowery dales, and sterile 
wastes, to overlook the perennial beauty and matchless fecundity at their 
feet, — ^while the lesser eminences with their deep ravines, o'erhanging 
difl^ and shadowy recesses, tell the place where the storm-winds recruit 
their tbrces and the zephyrs creep in to die. 

There are also large valleys, of equally fertile soil, upon the head waters 
of the Tlameth river, near the southern boundary, well worth the attention 
of emigrants. 

The most interesting portion of the Western Division, however, is that 
bordering upon the Wsdlammette and its affluents. The valley of this river 
is one hundred and fifty miles long by thirty-five broad. The soil is a deep 
alluvion, of extraordinary fertility. 

It is not only well watered, but well timbered, and produces all the vege- 
tables, fruits, and grasses indigenous to the country, with astonishing pro- 
fuseness. No region was ever better adapted to agricultural or grazing 
purposes. 

The Fualitine Plains, adjoining this beautiful expanse of fertiUty upon 
the left, towards the Columbia, embrace an area of forty-five miles in length 
by fifteen in breadth, well watered and amply timbered, with a soil in all 
respects equal. 

The Kiackamus, Putin, Fualitine, Yamhill, and other rivers, are all of 
them skirted by beautiful and fertile valleys of greater or less extent, while 
the adjacent hills and prairies afibrd not only frequent forests of excellent 
timber, but generally a very good soil. 

The landscape of this vicinity, though not, strictly speaking, hilly, is 
highly indulating, but quite productive in grass and herbage. 

The Cawlitz river, which empties into the Columbia a short distance below 
the Wallammette, has several rich bottoms, and waters a hu'ge extent of 
country, admirably adapted to stock-raising and agriculture. 

At the mouth of the Wallammette river is an island some fifteen miles 
in length by nearly the same distance in breadth, called Wappato; it is of 
a deep alluvial soil, formed from sedimentary deposites and decayed vegeta- 
ble substances, and is very rich and densely timbered. 

The country at the mouth of the Columbia and for some ten or fifteen 
miles interior, is sandy and sterile, — a fact much to be regretted, as from 
its peculiar locality this point must necessarily become the site of a vastly 
important commercial emporium, vieing in population, splendor, and opu- 
lence, the time*grown cities of more eastern climes. 

The stately forests of pine and fir, in the Western Division of Oregon^ 
have for a Ions time challenged the admiration of the world, and it is 
strongly doubted whether the chosen veterans of foreign woods can produce 
a rivid to some few specimens of the proud giants of its soil* 

These not unfrequently tower to a height of two hundred feet, and even 



968 A GLANCE AT THE WHOLE. 



^0t0^0^0i0^0t0^fttt0i0^0^0t0^0^0^0t0t0t0^m0^0^0t0^^^0^0^0*0^^^0^0^0^^0^0^^^^^^^^0^^*0^^*0^*0*0^^^ H-TULT ' -n n n I 'lnn i Tnnnnnr^rvvvvvvvvvv^r i rM' i nn nnfWBr 



firom one hundred and fifty to one hnndied and seTenty^^re 
feet clear of lunb, with scarcely a curve in the entire length. 

One of them, standinff near Fort George on the Ck>lumbia river, is said 
to measure forty-seven feet in circumference, three hundred and fifty feet 
in altitude, and two hundred and sixty-five ieet clear of limb ; another, upoo 
the Umpqua river, is reported even luger , and yet another, in the same 
vicinity, veiy nearly equals it in size. 

Timber of this land afibrds the choicest article for lumber, which bears a 
very high price at the Sandwich Islands and In various parts of Mexico, 
and will no doubt become a staple commodity in the commerce of Oregon; 
while the immense forests of pine, fir, and oak, rearing their stately heads 
in thick array, must prove a sure source of wealth to its future inhabir 
tants. 

The principal kinds of wood indigenous to tht country are white-oak, 
live-oak, maple, ash, pine, fir, cedar, hemlock, spruce, cottonwood, aspen, 
and cherry. 

Live-oak is found chiefly in the southern part, and, in quality, stands 
foremost among the denizens of the forest for snip- building. Several other 
species of oak are more or less abundant in various parts. 

In review of the subjects occupying the preceding pages, we may pre- 
sent the following summary : 

Nearly one-fifSi of the entire territory is timbered ; three-eighths of it 
may be successfully cultivated, (embracing the richest lands in the Federal 
Domain.) and two-thirds of it may afibrd pasturage for cattle, horses, 
and sheep. 

It is generally better watered and much better timbered than California ; 
and, though its harbors are inferior in regard to safety and ease of acceas, 
Oregon possesses other advantages, aside from soil and climate, com- 
pensating, in some measure, for these obvious deficiencies, and which com" 
nine to render it a most eligible point of emigration. 



989 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

Cfamate of Oragon ; its varialileiwiB ; its rains; a Mmthem etiaiate m a nortbsm 
hUitade.~ProdoctiYeiieM; gmin, fraite, and flowen, wild and cultivated.— Geo> 
loffical characteristics. — Soils and prevailing rock. — Minerals, dec — ^Variety of 
ff^aine.— Wohres. — Horses, and other domestie animals. — Population, white and na- 
tives ; Indian tribes, their character and condition. — ^Missionary stations, and their 
inqxrovements. — Present trade of Oregon. — ^Posts of the Httdson Bay Gompai y.— 
SettlenientB.-1-Oregon City, its sitoation and advantages ; about Linnton ; about 
WaUammette valley, Foalitine Plains, and Umpqua river ; Vancouvre, and its su- 
perior advantages. — Kindness of Hudson Bay Company to settlers. 

The next which eeems to demand our notice, in due order, is the climale 
of this interesting country. I 

We need only bear in mind the geographical positicm and diversified 
character of Oregon, to satisfy ourselves of the true merits of the subject 
now before us. A mountainous country like this must necessarily em- 
brace every variety of climate, from that of the ice-bound coasts and eve% 
scathing frosts of the polar regions, to the burning heat of the equator,^-* 
fiom the mild atmosphere of ludian skies, to the genial temperature which 
paints the wild-flowers in their primeval beauty, while month succeeding 
month doles out the year, nor feels nor knows the chiU-breath of winter. 

A short jaunt at an}r time translates the traveller, at ^his own option, 
to regions of vmter, spring, summer, or fall, and spreads before him all the 
varied beauties and defomuties of either. 

As a ffeneral thing, however, the winters of Oregon are much more tern* 
perate &an those of countries in the same latitude bordering upon tho 
Atlantic— a fsct which may be attributed to the usual prevalence of wes- 
terly winds at that season. 

These winds, on passiner the mountains and traversing the vast extent 
of snowy prairie and open land in their course, become vested with a chill* 
ing severity unknown to its incipiency, when, from the warm bosom of the 
broad Pacific, ihey first waft themselves o*er the blooming valleys, smiling 
plains, grass-K^lad hills, and mountains garbed in stately forests, comminc^lea 
with stem desolation, to lavish upon all these varied scenes the soft Uan* 
dishments of the Indies, and engender the interesting phenomencm of a soutl^ 
em climate in a high northern latitude. 

The country contiguous to Frasier's river, and even below it for some 
distance, is usually visited with long and severe winters, and enjoys com^ 
paratively but a short interval of genial weather during the spring and* 
summer months. 

The valleys, however, not unfrequently «EM exceptions to this lemark^ 
when fiivorably located in regard to the wind and sun. In this section ii 
seldom lains, a curcumstance causing an unproductive and arid soiL 

23* 



270 CUKATB or OREGON. 

The Eastern Division ia, perhaps, more yariable in regard to tempen- 
tnie than any other portion of Oregon. Its valleys are usually possessed 
of a mild and delightful climate, so much so that stock will subsist the 
entire winter without being fed or housed. 

The plains and high prairies present a longer interval of inclement 
weather, and the snow continues on the ground for a much greater length 
of time, than in the low-lands. 

Some particular localities are subject to very sudden changes, and not 
unfrequently experience the warm breath of summer with the chill blasts 
of fresh-born winter during the short lapse of a single day and night 

In reference to the high mountains, it is sufficient to remark, that with 
them winter is a season too congenial not to be felt in all its rigors, to 
the entire extent of its duration. The diversity of temperature in these 
parts depends mostly upon the altitude. The lower benches experiencing 
a mild atmosphere even in the severest weather, permit the snow to re- 
main only for a short interval succeeding its fall, and woo the willing 
spring ; while the higher ones treasure up each descending flake to nour- 
ish the scathing blasts that leap from the mountain-tops, fresh-cradled 
in the lap of winter. 

Notwithstanding these apparent disadvantages, the Eastern Division 
may be regarded as universally healthy. The purity of the atmosphere, 
and its absence from noxious exhalations and disease-engendering effla- 
f ia, undoubtedly contribute the prime cause in producing a result so 
favorable. 

Rains are not usual to this part in the summer months, nor even in 
the winter and spring are they common to any great extent. The snows 
of winter, together with the rains of that season and autumn, and the 
occasional dews of summer, in most cases, aflbid a sufficient moisture to the 
low-lands for agricultural purposes. 

That section situated between the Blue and Cascade Mountains, known 
as the Middle Division, is said to possess, comparatively, a much milder 
and less variable climate. 

The winters are usually open and of short duration, snow lying upon 
the ground, in the valleys, rarely exceeding four days in succession, and 
vegetation, in some instances, remains green the entire season. The prai- 
ries, too, are generally covered only for a short time. 

The heat of summer lacks that oppressiveness so common to mopt 
countries. In regard to the health of this section, we may correctly apply 
the observations made relative to the Eastern Division. A country situ- 
ated like the one now forming the subject of our remarks, cannot be oth- 
erwise than healthy, as a general thing. 

The snow of winter and the rains of spring and autumn, coupled with 
the light dews of summer, furnish all the moisture usual to the soil, 
which the moderate heat of the latter season renders sufficient for the 
growth of vegetation and the production of grain and other crops. 

The Western Division possesses not only a soil but a climate more fa- 
vorable to vegetation than any other portion of Oregon. In the southern 
part it seldom snows, and the weather is so mild, that the grass continues 
green and flourishing the entire year. Water never freezes, unless it 
oe in aome elevated pool or lake. 



PRODUCTIONS OF DIFFERENT SECTIONS. S71 

The absence of sufficient rains and dews, however, during the sammer 
months at some points, renders an occasional resort to irrigation necessary 
for the production of corn, potatoes, and articles of a like nature. 

Two crops of some kinds of produce may be raised with success in a 
single year. 

In the vicinity of the Wallammette, the winters are only a trifle colder. 
Running water seldom freezes. Snow never falls to exceed the depth 
of a few inches, and disappears in a very short time succeeding. 

Vegetation in the valleys, and even upon the plains, to some extent, 
remains green year in and jrear out. Of course no better climate could 
be selected for stock-raising. 

These remarks may be applied with equal propriety to the other por- 
tions of the Western Division south of the Columbia and in its immediate 
vicinity. The country further north, for a considerable distance, posses- 
ses a climate almost as favorable. The snows of winter, however, are 
usually more frequent and less transitory in their continuance. 

The cold season is confined almost exclnsivelv to the three winter months. 
The heat of summer is moderate and agreeable, generally ranging at 6S^ 
Fahrenheit, above zero, in its mean temperature. 

The wet season of the Western Division usually occurs from October to 
March of each year, inclusive ; at other times ram seldom falls. During 
this season it descends in gentle showers, or in the shape of mist, at inter- 
vals, for about one half of the time. The moisture received into the earth 
meanwhile, together with the nightly dews and other favorable agencies 
during the sammer months, renders the soil adapted to cultivation. 

Back from the valleys and bottoms, the atmosphere is quite wholesome 
and salubrious. Fevers are seldom known, and jpulmonary complaints are 
equally rare. 

In the vicinity of the Columbia, intermittent fevers are not uncommon, 
though by no means as bad as in some parts of our frontier States. 

Next in the order before us come the various productions which may 
be, and are, successfully cultivated in the diiSerent sections of this part of 
our national domain. 

The soil and climate of the Eastern Division have been sufficiently test- 
ed to know their capacity for producing nearly, if not quite, all the various 
grains, vegetables, and fruits usually grown in our Northern and Middle 
States. A great' variety of wild fruits and vegetables grow spontaneously, 
in difl^rent parts, and in great abundance. 

The soil and climate, as a whole, seem better adapted to the culture of 
fruits and grains, than vegetables ; and perhaps we might add, for the rail- 
ing of cattle, horses, and sheep, than agriculture ; though the latter obser- 
vation is not to be so construed as to affirm that &rming may not be sue- 
cessfuUy and profitably prosecuted in many parts. 

The Northern Division, or that portion of Oregon lying on the head- 
waters of the Columbia, in the vicinity and south of Frasier's river, and 
upon the Chilkeelis, being much colder and more sterile, must necessarily 
be regarded ih a less favorable light than the country referred to in thd 
preceding paraCTaph. But, little is known as to its products or the capa- 
cities of its soil and climate; yet, it is said that some particular kinds of 



S9S PREVAILING ROCK. 



<w>w»»«<w»<«»»«»»<«w«*w<»wMMWwwMMW»<^ ■ 



tail ue indiflenoiis to th» regioo, and it is geneniWj snppoeed tliat wheat* 
btMv, oats, Dackwheat, flax, and' other articles of like nature, might be 
laieed within it Of course, these remarks apply only to the valleys. 

The Middle Division affnds a finer soil ana a more foivorable climate 
than the Eastern^ but, in regard to productions, it is much the same. AU 
the northern fruits, grains, and vegetaUes, may be produced in great abun* 
dmce, with the exception of com — the hmd being generally too dry and 
too much subject to unseasonable frosts ; com, however, has been success- 
fnUy cultivated on the WallawaUa. 

There are several varieties of wild fruits found here, among which are 
included cherries, with larb, buffid , goose, and service berries, and cu^ 
nudts, plums, and grapes, togisther with several other species not recollect- 
ed, as well as vegetables and roots. 

The Westem Division not only maintains its pre-eminence in relation to 
•oil and climate, but stands equally conspicuous in the variety and aban- 
dance of its productions. It is thought, and not without reason, that cotton, 
•ogar-cane, and various other productions of a warm and even tropical 
cfimate might here be raised without difficulty. 

When the ground is in a suitable condition, the avarage crop of wheat 
i» from twenty to twenty-five bushels to the acre. Vast quantities of it ue 
•nniially produced by settlers in different parts of th^ dSuntry. A surplus 
of one hundred thousand bushels is reportec^ to have been grown, in tbe 
legion adjoining the Wallammette, during the summer of 18&. 

The Hudson Bay Company, at Fort Vancouvre, have several very ex* 
tensive farms under improvement, upon which they raise nearly every va- 
net^ of grain and vegetables, with flattering success. 

In the garden of McLaughlin, the chief lactor of this company, are found 
almost every species of fruits and flowers indigenous to this country and 
to foreign soils of the same latitude, with several varieties producea only. 
in warm climates. 

We barely allude to the above facts, in order to* prove the adaptation of 
Westem Oregon to agricultural pursuits. The data relative to its extraer- 
dinaiy fieu^ilities for rearing countless herds of cattle, horses, and sheep, 
have already been placed before the reader, and need not here a repetition. 

l^e components of tiie soils of Oregon are equally varied in character, 
according to their situation. The bottoms are usually of a deep, sandy 
alluvion, intermixed with vegetable and organic matter. The valleys are 
of a heavy loam, enriched by the debris and other fertilizing properties 
home Irom the high j?rounds by the annual rains, together with the con- 
stant accumulation of decayed herbage and grass so lavishly bestrown at 
each returning season. 

The prairies are possessed of either a light sandy superfice, 6r a mixture 
of gravel and stifl* clay. The superstratum of the hills and mountains 
vanes from wastes of naked sand, sun-baked clay, and spreads of denuded 
rock, to a thin vegetable mould, and a light marly loam of greater or less 
fecundity. 

The rock of this territory also presents many different specimens; the^ 
pofominent classifications, however, are volcanic, viz : basalt, (columnar and 
seoriated,) trap, lava, pumicestone, limestone (fossiliferous, bituminous, 
md earthy,) and mica slate, with sandstone, puddingstone, granular quarts^ 



POPULATION OF THE TIBHITORT. 27S 

calcareous tufiu and agglcmierated boHkbn of various kinds, porticalarij 
in the Eastern Division. The varieties of some parts present strong chuw 
acteristics of the oolite formation. The hills contain many excellent qnai^ 
Ties for the structure of buildings or other ua^ol purposes. 

Hitherto but little investigation has been had relative to the mineral i6*> 
lources of Oregon ; though sufficient is known to warrant the statement, 
(hat copper, lead, iron, coal, salt, soda, sulj^ur, nitre, and alum, are abundant 
ki some parts ; and, from the nature of toe country, we may safely infer that 
jret more valuable metals are waiting to reward with their hidden treasures 
the researches of man. 

Game, in the Eastern and Middle Divisions, is not generally plentiful ; 
yet, in places, there are an abundance of deer, elk, antelope, bear, wolves, 
and foxes ; — bnflalo are also found occasionally in the vicinity of the Rocky 
Mountains. In the Northern Division, moose, deer, elk, bear, foxes, and 
wolves, are the varieties most common. Game is more abundant in the 
Western than in the other Divisions, and is nearly of the same kind. 

Ducks, geese, brants, pheasants, partridges, &c., are conunon throughoiil 
the whole territory. 

Wolves are very numerous in the neighborhood of the settlements, and 
prove a great source of annoyance to the inhabitants by preying upon their 
cattle and oUier 6tdiik« These wolves consist of three kinds, — the black, 
gray, and prairie wolf, 6, yhich, as in California, the black wolf is the largest 
and most ferocious. ^. ' ^ 

As a grazing country, the available l,pinds of the three divisions of Oregon, 
south of the Columbia and the one immediately north of that river, are fittla 
inferior, if, indeed, not fully equal, to the far-:&med meadows and lawns of 
California. 

Horses are reared in vast numbers by the Indians, among whom it is oot 
uncommon to find a single individual owning three or four hundred hesiL 
Select horses may be l£)ught at prices ranging from twelve to twenty dol* 
lars each. 

These animals are generally stout and hardy, capable of enduring a vast 
amount of fatigue, and are but little inferior ui point of size to our Americaa 
nags. 

Large herds of horses are also raised by the settlers, and at the Hudson 
Bay Company's establishments. 

Latterly, cattle, hogs, and sheep, are beginning to receive the attention 
of the farmin£ community, and, without doubt, soon will become immensely 
numerous. It needs only the operation of time to render Oregon as fa- 
mous for its countless herds, as for the abundance and variety of its pro* 
dnctions* 

The entire population of the territory at this time, may be estimated at 
&irty-five thousand, of which about seven thousand are whites and half- 
breeds, and the balance Indians. 

The Indians principally consist of the following tribes : the Snakes, 
Blackfeet', Flatheads, Kesperces, Bonarks, Cyuses, Wallawallas, Chinook^ 
^hatchets, Chalams, Killamucs, Squamishes, Clasets, T&andos, Kladn* 
mns, Clatsup, Umpquas, Klackatats, Kallapuyas,TlanuLths, and Chilkeelis. 



274 mSSIONART STATTONS. 

The Blackfeet, thouffh included among the Oregon tribes, properly bdong 
to that portion of the Kocky Mountains contiguous to the head waters of 
the Missouri. They make occasional irruptions into the country occupied 
by tiie Flatheads, Snakes, and Nesperces, and for this reason are included 
in the above list. 

The Tlameths and two or three other inferior tribes in the neighborhood 
of California and north of the Columbia river may be considered troable- 
«ome and rather ill-disposed ; but not dangerous, unless it be in cases 
where they have a very decided advantage. 

The Indians of this country are less warlike than those east of the Rocky 
Mountains, and far less dangerous, even as enemies. They may be con- 
sidered, on the whole, as friendly to the whites, and quite susceptible of 
civilization. They are tolerably industrious, and ready at all times to work 
lor the settlers at a trifling compensation. 

Many of them cultivate the ground and raise com, potatoes, beans, and 
melons, — ^but fish, horses, and same, as a general thing, furnish their prin- 
cipal food. As an evidence of uieir quiet disposition, they rarely £;o to war, 
and are usually found at or near the several places claimed and occupied 
by them individually. 

The Nesperces are, perhaps, further advanced in civilization than any 
other tribe. Many of them (and some of other tribes) are beginning to 
live after the manner of the whites, and the ph .anthropic efibrts of Chiia- 
tian missionaries in their behalf have been attended with great success. 

There are eight of more missionary stations m Oregon, belonging as fol- 
lows : to the Presbyterians, the Methodists, and the Roman Cawolics. 

Four of these are situated between the Blue and Cascade Mountains, viz : 
one near the Dalls one at Waiilatpu on the Wallawalla, one at Tshimakain, 
and one at Clear Water. 

The mission at Waiilatpu is under the direction of Dr. Whitman, and 
has a flouring mill and a very considerable farm connected with it, upon 
which large quantities of grain and vegetables are annually raised,' aiui also 
numerous herds of cattle and horses. The station near the Dalls, with 
l3ie exception of a mill, is said to be but little behind that of Waiilatpu in 
point of prosperity. 

The remaining four are in the Western Division. 

The most important of tliese are situated as follows : one at the Waliam- 
mette Falls, about twenty-five miles below the Columbia, and the other m 
llie Wallammette valley, some forty or fifty miles farther south. 

Both of the above belong to the Methodists, and may be considered ricb. 

There are two large £Eirnis and a store connected with the station ill the 
Wallammette valley, and also large herds of cattle, horses, and hogs ; — it is 
said to drive quite a profitable trade with the Indians and settlers in the line 
of dry goods and groceries. 

The station at the Wallammette Falls has also a store, and carries on a 
snail business by wa^ of merchandize. 

The two other stations are south and west of the last named, but have, 
ts yet, no very sctensive improvements in connection with them. 

The Methodists have a press at one of their stations in Oregon, which is 

ployed in printing religious books for the benefit of the Indians. 



DIFFERENT SE1TLEMENT& 27^ 

lia addition to the different stations above alluded to, the Catholics havs 
several agents and teachers in this territory, who labor with great zeal and 
earnestness to make proselytes' to their own peculiar notions. The number 
and locality of these agents I have not the necessary information to state. 
They were, not long since, under the superintendance of one Father De 
Smit, a Jesuit priest, and have exerted considerable influence among the 
Indian tribes. 

Nearly the entire trade of Oregon, at the present time, is in the hands of 
the Hudson fiay Company, from whom dry goods and groceries may be ob- 
tained by the settlers at less than the conunon price in the United States ; 
this, as a necessary consequence, precludes all opposition. The principal 
exports (raised at the stations or received by way of baiter) are flour, nsh, 
butter, cheese, lumber, masts, spars, furs, and skins. 

The Forts, or trading establishments, are eighteen in all, and have a large 
number of hands employed about them, in conducting the fur trade and 
laboring upon the farms and in the workshops and mills. 

Each of these posts presents a miniature town by itself, whose busy pop- 
idace pursue most of the varied avocations incident to the more densely 
inhabited localities of civilized countries. 

We will ndt occupy the reader's time in an extended description of them 
severally, but rest content by simply giving their names. The first post 
belonging to this company, upon tne route to the mouth of the Columbia, is 
Fort HaU; the next, Fort Wallawalla; then, Fort Vancouvre, and Fort 
George. 

The others are situated at dififerent points, and are known as follows : 
Colville, Okanagan, Alexandria, Barbine, Klamloops, St James, Chilcothin, 
Simpson, McLaughlin, Langley, Nisqnally, Cawlitz, and Umpqua; of which 
eight are located m or above lat. 49^ noith. 

The principal settlements, disconnected from the trading establishm^itB 
and dif»rent missionary stations, at present, are upon the Umpqua and 
Wallammette rivers, on the Fualitine Plains, and near Fort Vancouvre. 
These settlements are represented as being in a very flourishing condition, 
tad rapidly increasing in population and wealth. 

At the Wallammette Falls, a town has been regularly laid out called 
Oregon City, which, in the year 1844, numbered a hundred or more 
houses ; among them was a church, with several stores and mills. 

At this place the temporary legislature, already instituted by the set- 
tlers for mutual benefit in the ab^ce of all other legitimate jurisdiction^ 
holds its regular sessions. A mayor was elected in the spring of 1846; 
aad recently a printing press and materials have been procured from New 
York for the purpose of publishing the territorial laws, with such other 
•documents and papers as the interests of the community may require. 

This embryo city, situated as it is in a place so admirable in regard to 
Agriculture, commerce, and manufactures, possesses many superior advao- 
tages in point of locality. 

The falls of the Wallammette are thirty feet perpendicular, and aflS>id 
abundant water privileges for mills and mctories, — two important riversy 
the Klackamus and Fualitine, find their discharge near it, while below is 
presented an uninterrupted navigation to the Ocean, and above it boats wxf 



fft KDfBNESS OP THE H. B. COMPANY. 



Mcend for a distence of one hundred miles or more. The ooantiy eon- 
tigooe 10 imsiirpeMed in fertility, and Will undoubtedly soon acquire a 
drase popolatioD. 

Another town, called LinntMi, has recently been commenced upoD the 
south bank of the Columbia, near the mouth of the Wallanunette iiver,aDd 
bids fair to become of some unportance. 

The settlements in the vaUey above, and at the Fualitine Plains, are scit- 
tered like those of the farming sections of our Westwn States*,— ths 
same observation may also be applied in reference to those upon the Um^ 
qua river. 

The settlement at Vancouvre is more compact, and assumes the air of 
aflourishing village. It is near the falls of tte Columbia, at the heado£ 
ship navigation, and is made the j^reat commercial depot of the HudMXi 
Bay Company for the articles required in their trade. 

Connected with the Fort is an extensive flouring mill, and also a saxr 
nuU. which is said to do a very active and lucrative business. 

llie number of buildings at Vancouvre is not fiir from sixty. The sils 
is a most admirable one for some future emporium of trade and manufae-^ 
tores. Its water privileges are almost without limits, while its other advaa* 
tages are equally inviting. 

The geographical condition of the country is such that, as it becomoi 
Mttled, an enormous amount of commercial mterest must necessarily con- 
centrate here ; and, doubtless, a more favorable locality for a city could not 
be selected upon the Columbia. It is destined to command almost the 
entire trade ot Eastern and Middle Oregon. 

The agents of the Hudson Bay Company at present are of great advan> 
tage to emimnts. They extend to them every reasonable assistance bf 
seuing goods and necessaries on credit at very low prices, and receiving 
their various products in payment upon most mvorable terms. They fw- 
nish seed-corn, wheat, potatoes, and other articles of Hke nature, to the set* 
tiers, to be returned in kind at the end of the year, with a small additioQal 
amount by way of interest 

This company is equally accommodating in other respects. It afMs 
employment to numbers at a fair compensaticm, and suppUes them with 
eattle, hogs, horses, and implements oi agriculture for their fitrms. Its 
agents ami &ctors seem much disposed to encourage the influx of emi- 
grants, and are never backward in evincing a Mendlj disposition by tfadr 



in 



CHAPTER XXVn. 



Ae BMiiii&ctiirixig hud^&m of Ogggon-^^C oi iii iM clal and agncnitonl adr amf w 
leviewed.— Bail Brad to tho Facifie.— 'Rome, mode of timirelliiig, and nqoiaio 
^qoipraenti for enignnlB.'-bBportaaoe of Oregon to the United States. — ^Inddeot 
in tlie e^ bistorf of Fort HalL— Wlij the Bladdwt are boatik, and bright 
fpotB in their character. — ^IQd weather. — LeaTO far the Flatte. — ^Journey to tho 
Yampah, and sketch of the intennediate coontry.— New Ftek.— Head of Giand • 
ther.^The landscape.— Difierent lootes to Fort TanraHer.— Old Pa^ 

Perhaps no country is possessed of greater nttnn&ctnnng facilitiiM 
(bm Oregon. Its numberless watercourses, with their fireqaent fiiUs and 
npids, npoii eveiy side, point ont the sites for mills and Victories, while 
the adjoining forests ana hills prodnce the timber finr their c<mstruction, 
cod the metsu for their machinCTy ; and the plains and valleys, the food for 
tibeir operatives, and raw materials for their fiEU>rics. The ships of all na- 
tioBs await as their carriers, and render accessible the best markets of the 
world. 

A large portion of the sterile and otherwise valueless lands of the terri- 
tffpr might be turned to good account in the growth of wool, and the valleys 
nd bottoms would easily yield exhanstless supplies of flax and hemp. The 
Wttthwest displays her cotton fields, and the plains and hills hold out their 
lich stores of timber and minerals ; the busy operatives and thrice eflfeo- 
tive machinery of the flourishing establishments, as yet scarcely hidden 
&om view by the thin veil of futurity, would achieve tbie transformation of 
varied products into broadcloths, linens, calicoes, and other auxiliap 
of comfort and utility ; while California, with the other provinces of 
iioo, the western Republics of South America, the islands of the Paci- 
fic, the Northwestern Coast, and the numerous Indian tribes of the interior, 
impatient to gaze upon the evidences of creative skill, even now stand their 
willing purchasers. 

WiSi snch advantages before her, who might not augur well for the fu* 
Uae pre-eminence of &«gon. 

But, in other respects, the prospect is still more flattering. Her exten- 
sive plains, valleys, and bottoms, need no long lapse of time to transform 
them into smiling fields ; her prairies and hills will then become thronged 
with countless herds of cattle and flocks of sheep, and the bee^ pork, and 
wod of the stock-grower, the butter and cheese of the dairyman, with all 
the surplus of the fanner, will find an inviting market at the populous 
ma&nmcturing towns and commercial cities that will have sprung up cloae 
aimmd him, nor need he look elsewhere for a more lucrative dispos^. 

An interchange of commodities with China, Japan, South America, tho 
EmI Indies, and tiie Polynesian and Aa^tralian islands, will pour tha 
wvalft of nations into her lap, and swell the opulence of her citizens. 

A continuous raii-road, from the Mississippi and the great lakes across 

24 



fnS EQUIPMISNT FOR EBf»3RAirrS. 

the Roclnr Monntaine to the falls of th6 Columbia, (a project quite pnttd* 
cable, and even now seriously contemplated,) will open a new channd ftr 
commerce, and then our merchantmen and whalers, instead of perfonning 
a ^bmgerous homewaid-bound voya^ of twelve thousand miles, by donfaliiMr 
the southern extremity of Africa, or that of the American continent, wfl 
dischaVffe their cargoes at the ports of « Oregon for a re-siupment to everf 
part of tlie Union, and thus unite their aid in the magic work of up-bnd» 
ing the Great West. 

It is then that the mighty resources of our national confederacy wiH be- 
gin more fully to develop themselves, and exhibit to an admiring world the 
giant strides of civilisation and improvement, when liberty is their biith* 
light, and freemen are their nursing fathers. It needs no prophetic eye to 
foresee all this, nor the eSSatt of centuries to transform this rough dcetcfa of 
fimcy into a more than sober reality. 

The over-land route, from Independence, Mo., to Fort Hall, a£Ebids t 
good waggon-road ; but that from Fort Hall to Vancouvre is generally eon' 
sidered impassable for other than pack-animals. It is said, liowever, (hit 
a new route has recently beed discovered, by which waggons may be taken* 
without much difficulty, the entire distance. Should this report prove troe^ 
the emigrant may convey everything needed for his comfort ouring ths 
]oDg journey before him. 

Emigrants should never go in companies exceeding one hundred and 
fifty or two hundred persons. The reason for this is obvious,— they 
will proceed more harmoniously ; there will be less difficulty in obtaining 
food for their animals; less delays en route; a better opportunity Imr tiie 
procurement of provisions by hunting, and the number is amply snffidoiet 
for mutual defence. 

From my own experience and observation, I would advise the use of 
pack-mules or horses altogether, instead of waggons. One pack^horae, 
suitably laden, would convey an ample supply of provisions ana olher n^ 
eessaries for two individuals, if recruited by occasional levies upon the 
game that, in many cases, throng their course. 

A company thus equiped, can travel with far greater expedition and 
even more comfortably. 

In case of sickness, a litter might easily be constructed for the convey- 
ance of the invalid by affixing to a horse two light poles, some twelve or 
fifteen feet in length, like the shafts of a wagon, the smaller extremities 
being listened to the saddle and the larger ones left to drag upon the groondi 
while two short pieces placed transversely upon them, astern the horae, 
present the framework for a bed in which the suflerer may repose or lie 
at his ease, with as much quiet as the tender object of a mother's caie in 
hs infJBintile cradle. 

A company acting upon the above suggestions (numbering say two 
hundred) should employ an efficient pilot, with a commandant and six* 
teen skilful hunters. 

Strict regulations for its government must also be. adopted and 0ih 
forced* Each individual should be furnished with a good riding horse or t 
mule, a good percussion rifle, (bore thirty or thirty-nve balls per lb.0 aiih 



IMPOBTANCE OP OREGON. 279 



nmnitioii sufficient for five hundred roands, and a butcher-knife, widi 
tols and the requisites for procuring fire. 

The company should be divided into messes of six each, and one him^ 
er and his assistant should be assigned to every two messes. Each meas 
shoidd be provided with three pack-mules, exclusively for the transporttp 
tion of its baggage and provision, and at least one loose animal for extra 
service. 

It should be further furnished with two camp-kettles, a tomahawk, n 
krflfe tin raess-pan, and a tin-cup and plate for eaco of its number. 

A li^ht tent might also be taken if deemed necessary ; though such aa 
article is of little use. A robe and a blanket for bedding, four AittB and « 
single change of clothes are as much baggage as any individual should 
think of taking for his own use. By these means his movements will be 
bee and unincumbered, while the whole company pursues its way with 
ease and rapidity. 

On reachmg his destination the emigrant may procure everything in the 
line of dry goods, groceries, and the implements of husbandry, at lesa 
Brices than in the States ; hence the fdly of burthening himself with extra 
baggage for a long and tiresome journey. 

The immense importance of Oregon to the United States is doubtless ap- 
parent to every oue. The facts upon which this inference is based, may 
oe briefly presented as follows: 

^ FirsL Bv the occupation of this country we shall secure to our own 
citizens the best trade of the whole world. 

Second, We shall preclude the dangerous supremacy of foreign powers 
upon our western frontier, and place our relations with the intermediate 
Indian tribes upon a safer and more permanent footing. 

Third, We shall retain to the U^km a vast territory, unexcelled in 
climate, rich in soil, and exhaustless in its various resources ; and thus 
lay open for the general wel£ue new channels for commerce and fisab 
fields for enterprise. 

Fourth, We shall (in the event of the proposed rail road) greatly en- 
hance the prosperity and wealth of the Western States. 

Fifth. We ^hall prevent the annual sacrifice of an immense amount of 
life and property in me navigation of a dangerous sea, for a distance of 
some twelve thousand miles. , 

Sixth. We shall afS>rd to our whalemen and ships engaged in the 
China and East India trade ports for supplies and repairs, and thus save to 
ourselves the yearly amounts now paid to foreign nations. 

Seventh. We stand in actual need of some point upon the coast of the 
Pacific as a rendezvous for our navy. 

There are many other weighty reasons that might be adduced in support 
of this inference, but whv should we further review the subject ? A can- 
did perusal of the preceding pages will have suggested them to the lead- 
er's mind without greater amplification on our part. 

In conclusion we need only to add, time wiU usher forth the embryo 
greatness and glory of Oregon ; but whether that greatness shall increase toe 
strength, or that glory commingle with the slowing lustre of our Federal 
tJxuODt while she figures as one in the proud family of States, or whether 



280 DAUNTLESS REP0BUOAN6L 

they, diflcarded by the fostering hand of maternal care, shall assume ^ 
energy of a giant's power and shine with the brightness of inoatQ 
effulgence as a distmet nation^ depends mach iqpon the prompt and judi- 
cious action of our govemmeut upon this momeotous subject 

During our stay at Fort Hall an incident connected with its eaiiy histo- 
ry was narrated to me, which, as it tends much to illustrate the bold daring 
tad spirit of inbred rq)ablicaniam possessed by the mass of trapping parties 
frequenting the mountains, I am tempted to truiscribe. 

Soon af&r this post came into the possession of its present owners, ser- 
end squads, on returning from their regular hunts, rendezvoused in its vi- 
cinity. According to & custom of the Hudson Bay Compaq on sucb 
occasions, the British flag was hoisted in honor of the event Tberenpon 
the ptoud mountaineers took umbrage, and forthwith sent a deputation to 
solicit of the commandant its removal ; and, in case he should prove un- 
willing to comply, politeljr requesting that, at .east, the Amepcan flag migtit 
he permitted a place by its side. Both of which propositions were pe^ 
emptorily refused. 

Another deputation was then sent announcing that, unless the Britidi 
flag should be taken down and the stars and stripes raised in its place witb- 
in two hours, they would take it down by force^ if necessary. To thiswas 
ictumed an answer of surly defiance. 

At the expiration of the time named the resolute trappers, mustering e» 
massey appeared before the Fort, under arms, and demanded its immediate 
surrender.- 

The gates had already been closed, and the summons was anwered by a 
shot from the bastion, ^veral shots were forthwith exchanged, but witfaoot 
much damage upon either side ; the trappers directing their aim principafly 
at the Briti^ flag, while the garrison, feeling ill-disposed to snoot down 
their own friends in honor of a few yards of parti-colored bunting, elevated 
their pieces and discharged them into the air. 

The result was that the assailants soon forced an entrance, took down 
and tore in pieces the hated flag, and mounted that of their own countiy in 
its stead, amid deafening huzzas and successive rounds of riflery. 

The commandant and his sub-cronies, retreating to a room, barricaded 
the entrance, when the trappers promptly demanded Uieir surrender upon the 
following terms : 

Ist The American flag shall occupy its proper place hereafter. 

3d. The commandant shsdl treat nis captors to the best liquors in his 
possession. 

3d. Unless the ofienders comply with these conditions, the captors w31 
consider Fort Hall and its contents as lawful plunder and act according^. 

After a short parley the besieged agreed to a capitulation. In compor 
ance with the seconcf article of uie terms, a barrel of whiskey, with sugar 
to match, was rolled into the yard, where Hie head was knocked out, udl 
the short but bloodless campaign ended in wild frolicking, as toast after 
toast was drunk in fimcied honor of the American flag, and round 9Sat 
round of responsive cheers told who were they that stoixl ever xendf 
proudly hail it and rally beneath its broad ^blds. 



• 9 

• • ■ • 

«• • • 



* ■ 
• • • « ' 



It 

• • * tf 







Buoonr Ann Fuxmbad tspua*.— Av* aea. 



THE 6LACKFEET. 288 

At the time of our visit, there were some sixty men comiected with this 
establishment These consisted princiDally of half-breeds and Canadian 
French, among whom were several wno had seen service in the nnre- 
lenting war between the whites and Bbckfeet that had been so lonff proe- 
ecuted. Many a thrilling story was narrated in connection with the his- 
tory of this war, none of which more interested me than the following 
ezmanation of its origin : 

The Blackfeet at first were friendly to the whites, and a very considerA 
able trade in guns and ammunition was carried on with them by the latter. 
Like most sava£;e8, they became great admirers of the potency and use o( 
gunpowder, ana were quite curious to ascertain the process hj which it, 
could be had independent of the whitea. In answer to inquiries, they 
were informed it was the seed of a species of grain, and might be multi- 
plied in like manner to any extent by cultivation. 

Accrediting the story and captivated with the idea of raisins their own 
powder, a large quantity was purchased for that purpose, which was care- 
fully planted, in full expectation of an abundant harvest. 

Their disappointment at the result will be readily supposed. Denoun- 
cmg the whites as liars and cheats, they were not slow to avow their med- 
itated revenge. 

It needed, however, yet another act of perfidy to work the more perfect 
transformation of friends into foes. This soon after was consummated as 
follows : 

The Blackfeet and Flatheads met, at an appointed place, for the purpose 
of trade and the maintenance of friendly relations, as was theur annual 
custom. 

During this conference, the head chiefs of the two nations commenced 
descanting upon the merite and fieetness of their respective horses, which 
resulted in a banter, a bet, and a race. 

The Flatheads, producing two of their fastest chargers, were backed by 
the Blackfeet in a like number ; and, upon the success of the particular 
fiivorites, not only the honor of the two nations was staked, but a large 
amount of other valuables. The race was run, and, the result proving 
dose, both parties claimed the wager. 

Upon this a dispute ensued, and finally the whole matter was referred 
to tlu^e white men, by whose decision they agreed to abide. The arbitra* 
tors, through mere personal predilection, instead of prcmouncing it a tie, as 
they should have done, awarded the palm to the Flatheads. 

The Blackfeet gave in to the decision and relinquished the stakes, but 
from that day forth avowed themselves the eternal enemies of both whites 
tnd Flatheads. This occurrence dated the commencement of an unre- 
lenting war of extermination on their part, nor have they permitted any 
suitable opportunity of wreaking their vengence upon the offenders t(>^ 
pass unimproved. 

Notwithstanding the bad character generally ascribed to the Blackfeet, 
they possess traite worthy of admiration. As enemies, they make no dis- 
guise of their hostile designs ; and though they have been known to meet 
with parties of whites without coming in coussion, and even to smoke 



2M THE MEDICINE SHOT. 

with them ; yet, on such occasions, they have uniformily declared the annb- 
tice a temporary one, and in force only for the time being. 

Instances have been known of trappers penetrating into their viHages 
unawares, who received the treatment of guests during their stay, and 
were allowed to depart unmolested upon expressing their wishes to that 
%fbcL 

The bright spots in the character of these Indians are more foUy devel- 
oped in the following example : 

Several years ago, two trappers, in their excursicms for beaver, dis- 
covered a Blackfoot engaged in butchering. Thinking the present a &vor- 
able opportunity to reduce the number of their enemies, they cautiously 
aj^roached the unsuspecting operator with the design of aflbrding him a 
speedy transition to the . Sjiirit Land. 

Having advanced withm gun-shot, they were almost in the very act of 
firing, when a casual glance revealed the duskv forms of savages who 
surrounded them at no great distance, and in such a manner as to ]neclude 
all possibility of escape ; but as yet, however, the intended victim was 
ignorant of their presence. / 

On observing the danger of their situation, theyi^ushed up to him, and, 
seizing his hands, claim^ his protection. The excitement of the moment 
having subsided, he replied : — 

^ Your lives belong to me,-*you might have taken mine ; it must not 
be said that the Blackfoot is ungratetuL Come with me and you are 
safe." 

Upon this he led the way to the village near by, and made them the 
guests of his own family. 

Everything that generous hospitality could devise for comfort and pleas- 
ure, was placed at their disposaL The villagers seemed to vie with each 
other in their attestation of friendship and good will, and repeatedly solicited 
them to remain and join the^ibe. 

However, on expressing a wish to leave, they were escorted for some 
distance en route, and left to choose their own course of travel, with the 
parting monition : " We are now friends. — ^When next we meet it will be 
as enemies !"* 

* The Blackfeet are generally accounted brave, thoush instances have been 
known of three or four whites defeating a large party of toem^ On one occasion, 
three trappers fell into an ambuscade of these Indians, and two of them were instantly 
shot from their horses, but the third was left untouched, and spurring his animal to 
the height of its speed, broke through the whole throng and was soon out of reach. 

Four mounted Indians immediately started in pursuit, and gained rapidly upon 
him till they came within shooting distance, when the lone trapper turned upon them, 
and with his double-barreled rifle picked off two of their number, and again ffed. 

Confident of securing their intended victim, now that they supposed his fire-anw 
were uncharged, the remaining two hurried after him, and m a row moments wen 
wthin range of pistol-shot. The trapper then again halted, and the dischaige of a , 
pistol brought the third to the ground. 

Drawing forth a second from his belt, the work of slaughter would have been com- 
plete,' had not the terrified sava^, in his turn, fled with the utmost precipitancy. The 
tnpper pursued, but was far m the rear when the Blackfoot regained his oon- 
nd», and hurriedly exclaimed : 

" Haste, ye ! flee ! It was the Big Medicine we pursued, and at his word three 
of our wamors breathe not, and of ^ur I only have escaped ! His single me<ticins- 



YAMPAH RIVER. 28^ 

Nov, iOih, Yielding to the solicitations of my comrades demontes, I 
am afain joameying for the Platte. During the brief period of our stay at 
Fort Hall, we enjoyed mild and agreeable weatiier, as a general thing ; 
enly one inconsiderable fall of snow havincr occurred meanwhile, and the 
grass, even yet, in many pkces, is green and fresh. 

Notwithstandin? the lateness of the season, we anticipate but little diffi- 
culty in crossing me mountains, via New Park and Grand river pkis<^, as the 
journey has been performed on several occasions in the dead of winter. 
But, a further stimulant to our hopes is the possession of good mules and 
horses, which are every way competent to the task before them ; my two 
companions are, also, intimately acquainted with the mountains, and well 
£now how to shape our course to advantage. 

For the first few days our progress was rapid and uninterrupted. Foi« 
lowing the regular trail by way of Bear river, on the 24th we struck 
Black's fork, a considerable tributary of Green river, and one of several in 
its neighborhood, down which we continued to its confluence with the main 
stream ; thence, crossing to the east bank, we kept its general course, some* 
times by its valley, then again by long detours among the hills, owing to 
the rugged nature of tlie country, and in three days subsequent, reached 
the Yampah, or Little Snake, an affluent from the left. 

The intermediate country from Fort Hall to the Yampah has been par- 
tially noticed in connection with Oregon and California, and for that reason 
it will not be expected of me to wasto time in repetition. 

I need only add, that among the hills we noticed much nude sterility, in- 
termingled with frequent clusters of absinthe, aretmisia (or greasewood, as 
it is familliarly called,) and bunch-grass, with occasional groves of pine^ 
cedar, and balsam. 

In the valleys the grass was yet green, and indicated the presence of 
winter only by its withered tops. Snow was seen only upon the hills and 
mountains, and even there in no great quantity. Game appeared plentiful 
for most of the distance, particularly black-tailed deer and sheep. 

The section of country hereaboute is inhabited by the Snake Indians, 
from whom the river above referred to derives its name. 

This stream heads in the New Park Mountains, and pursues a south- 
west course for about one hundred miles, recieving in that distance seve- 
ral large tributaries from the east, when it finaUy discharges itself into 
Green river, near lat. 41^ North. 

Crossing the Yampah, we soon struck the Elk Head, or Little Bear, a 
principal s&uent from the right, and continuing our course up its valley. 
After passing a small ridge, on the 30th Nov. we found ourselves upon the 
head waters of the Platte. 

Iron twice spoke the death-word, and at the same time ; then with his pipenstem h» 
bode a thira one go to the Spirit Land ; and, as he drew forth his butcher-knife to 
ihoot me, I had fled beyond reach, that I might tell you how to escape ! Haste, ye ! 
flee ! It is the Big Medicine that comes from yon ! Flee, lest he kill us all !" 

Following bis tidvice, the astonished savages immediately fled with the greatest' 
eonstemation, fully persuaded it was their only mode of escaping from certain de« 
lUuction at the hands of the Bio Medicine ! 



Sd6 THENEWPAJUL 

Proceeding by the valley of a creek tributaiy to the above river, die day 
following we came to a considerable branch from the south, and camped 
near its mouth, for the purpose of killing buflklo, of which vast numbers 
thronged the vicinity. 

The valleys of the Yampah and Little Bear were broad, in places, with a 
deep soil of dark, sandy kam, and tolerably well timbered. 

1 he country contiguous to them was rugged and generally sterile ; tin 
soil, with the exception of the creek bottoms, being bmlUow and sandy, and 
infested with extensive fields of (dfsinthe. 

By the wav we passed a fort, formerly occupied by a company of tra|^ 
pers under the command of Frapp, near which himself and four other 
whites were killed in an engagei^ent with the Sioux some two years since. 
The Indians lost fifteen or twenty of their warriors in killed and wounded, 
bat succeeded in drivinjgr ofiT eighty head of horses as their booty. 

Among the rocks of the hills I noticed frequent clusters of larb, richly 
laden with its deep red berry,* both tempting to the eye and pleasing to the 
taste. 

On reaching the Platte we were ushered into a large and beautiful circu- 
Uu* valley, known as the New Park. 

This valley is thirty-five miles in width by thirty in breadth, and is shnt 
In upon all sides by loftv mountains, whose summits tower far above the 
ODOw-line and sport their white-caps through each returning year. It is 
wqU watered by numerous streams that trace their course fix>m the neigh- 
boring heights to commingle with the Platte. 

Tte river makes its exit from this place by a forced passage through na^ 
raw defiles, between the Medicine Bow and New Park Mountains, formmg 
a canon several miles in length, defined by precipitous walls, varying in 
height firom fifty to six hundred feet 

The New Park valley aflbrds considerable timber of various kinds, and a 
fertile soil, well adapted to cultivation. The superfice is usually a thick 
mould, compounded of clay, sand, and gravel, with decomposed vegetable 
matter ; while the bottoms disclose a rich alluvion of two or three feet 
depth. 

The entire countiy was crowded with game, in countless numbers, both 
of bufialo, elk, and deer. It seemed as though a general ingathering from 
mountain, hill, and plain, had taken place to winter in this chosen spot 

It is said the great abundance of game first suggested the christening of 
the locality as the New Park, 

We remained in our encampment till the 6th of December, and improved 
the interval in procuring a choice supply of meat, and feasting upon thoee 
delicions viands which mountaineers so well know how to acquire and dis- 
pose of. 

The day preceding our departure, a fidl of snow covered the ground for 

* Tbs larb-berry is of adeep red color, and wNnawhat huger than the common csT 
IMIL It IB of a sweet spicy taste, and very pleasant. It grows upon a small poaat 
^rtns of evergreen, vrith a leaf assimilating the winter-clover in shape, ard is foond 
mif In mountainous regiona. 



ROUTE TO BAYOU 8ALDAE. ^W 

severa] inches, but the lapse of a few hours served to discloM the bote 
vegetation of the valleys, and denuded spots upon the mountain sides. 

Again en route, we continued up a large stream from the south and struck 
into a broad trail, which led through lu'ge openimp and forests of aspen 
across the main mountain chain, to the waters of Grand river, into a bean* 
tiful valley known as the Old Park, where we remained encamped the two 
days subsequent. 

Our nearest route to Fort Lancaster would have been by C^he a la 
Poudre, or Long's Peak ; but, accumulating snows admonished us to abaiH 
don the Atlantic side of the mountains for a more southern latitude. 

The country in the vicinity of the Old Park is highly interesting. It em- 
braces a large tract of fertile territory, well waterea and timbered, but more 
or less undulating, and is hemmed in by high mountains, which are clothet 
with lateral forests of pine, cedar, and aspen. 

This valley ranges from east to west ; and, heading at the base of Long's 
Peak, finds its opposite extremity at the canon by which Grand river 
emerges through the opposing barriers of mountain spurs. 

The Old Park also, like the New, receives its appellation from the gmt 
abundance of game for which it is celebrated. 



CHAPTER XXVin. 



fmok Grand river to Bayou Sal&de. — ObBervations by the way. — ^Description of the 
Bayou. — Voracity of magpies.— Journey to Cherry creek.— Country en route. — 
Crystal creek. — Abundance of game. — Antelope hunting. — Remarkable sagacity of 
weaves. — Snow storms and amusement — Ravens. — Move camp.~K^omfortable win* 
ter quarters. — Animal food conducive to general health and longevity.— A laugha- 
ble instance of sound sleeping. — Astonishing woliine rapacity. — ^Beaver lodges ani 
all about beaver. — Hunting excursion.— Vasque's creek, its valleys, table lands, 
mountains, and prairies. — Camp. — Left alone. — Sensations, and care to avoid dan- 
ger. ^A nocturnal visitor. — ^Thrilling adventure and narrow escape.—- A lofty speci- 
men of* gettin down stairs." — Geological statistics. 

While camped at the Old Park, I improved the opportunity for ranging 
among the adjacent mountains, whose stern recesses disclosed many smi£ 
ing beauty-spots. The weather continued pleasant, though somewhat coldei* 
tiian usual ; and, notwithstanding the snow in places lay quite deep, it had 
acquired great solidity and compactness. 

thi the 10th of December we were again under way. 

Croesing Grand river and continuing up a southern tributary, through a 
a narrow detile of mountains, to a large valley formed at the junction of 
three principal branches, known us La Bonte s-hole, and choosing the xx&k^ 
die one, we proceeded to its head^thence, passing the dividing ndge by t* 
wall-beaten buflalo trail, to the right' of Long's Peak, on tSe IGlh wo 



tSB TORACTTV or MAGPIES. 

reached Bayoa Sal&de, another extensive valley at the head of the Soudi 
Fork of the Platte. Here, selecting a good camping place in a beaatifol 
grove of aspen, we remained till the 19th inst. 

This last stage of onr jonmey proved difficult and tedioiOB. Ahhongh the 
passing throngs of hnffido had aflbrded a well-marked trail, our horses fre- 
quently became so mired in snow we were compelled to extricate them by 
main 8trength,-^wo or three storms, in the mean time, having increased the 
quantity to an average depth of twelve or fourteen inches. 

The vaUeys and sunny hill-sides, however, were generally bare, and a^ 
lorded some agreeable respites to the toil of travelling. 

The prevailing rock appeared to be granite, mica slate, and sandstone. 
J^he soil of the valleys gave evidence of fertility, as did occasional spots 
upon the hill-sides. 

The streams were most of them skirted with cottonwood, aspen, and box- 
elder, while the hills and mountains presented frequent groves of pine and 
cedar. 

Game, in all the diflerent varieties common to the country, was seen in 
ipreat abundance the entire route. 

Bayou SaJ&de is a valley some thirty-five miles long by fifteen wide, 
bounded upon all sides by lofty mountain chains, with tiie exception of the 
south, where a broad stretch of high, rugged hills and rolling prairies sepa- 
rates it from the Arkansas. 

The Platte, on emerging from this place, makes its final entrance into the 
grand prairie by a narrow gorge in the mountain chain that extends to a 
distance of several miles. Upon the southeast, the fix}wning summits of 
fake's Peak tower to a height of 12,500 feet above the level of the Gulf of 
Mexico, and upon the west tiie continuous chain of the Green Mountains, 
clothed in eternal snow, point skyward in solenm grandeur. 

The numerous streams that find their sources in the neighborhood are 
well timbered, and present many interesting bottoms of rich alluvial so'l. 

The valley is densely thronged with baflalo, while vast quantities of 
deer, elk, and antelope unite to increase the number and variety of its 
game. 

The weather at this time proved uncogifortably cold. Snow lying upon 
the ground to the depth of several inches, we were necessitated to feed oar 
horses upon cottonwood bark during the interim. 

Bayou SalSLde bears the name of being subject to severe winters, but 
whether correctiy or not, I am unable to say. It is undoubtedly well 
. adapted to stock-raising, and, were it not for unseasonable firosts, might be 
turned to good account for agricultural purposes. 

The magpies were more troublesome and audacious in their depredations 
hereabouts, than in any place we had yet visited. Two mules, whose 
backs had become sore from continued service tinder the saddle, were se- 
verely annexed by these relentiess pesecutors, which, despite opposing 
iflbrt, would pierce the skinless flesh with their beaks and feast upon their 
agonizing victims. 

To save the poor suflferers from being devoured alive, we were com- 



CAMP AT CHEERY CEEEK. ^M 

peDed to envelope tbem with thick coverings of buffiilo robes, and even then 
the rapacious connorants could scarcely be prevented from renewing their 
cruel repast 

Dec I9ik. Afiain resuming our journey, we continued in a southeast 
direction, over a Ipw ridge of hills, and found ourselves in a very rough 
country, interspersed with frequent valleys which head seveiai well tim- 
bered affluents of the Arkansas ;-*thence, passing around the southern 
extremity of a lofty mountain range, we struck ForUaine fui Bouit a few 
miles below the Soda spring. 

Crossing this stream, we travelled north by west, fc^wing the moun- 
tain ridge at its base for some forty miles, which brought us to the Platte ; 
—thence, keeping the river bottom, on the 28th we made camp at Cheny 
creek, a short distance above its mouth. 

The interesting and romantic country in the vieinity of Pike's Peak and 
ForUaine qui Bouit has already been described in full, and needs but one 
passing remark in attestation of the mildness of its climate, viz : the 
ground was free from snow, and aflbrded occasiopal spots of green grass. 

Near this place we encountered a small hunting party of Arapaho In- 
dians, and obtained from them a choice supply of frmh mei^ 

The interval from the Soda spring to the Platte, after passing liie hie]|« 
towering and isolated walls of red granitic sandstone to toe noithward, be» 
trays a mixed character of wildiiess and beauty. The vast forests of stately 
pines, surmounting the long rolling hills to the right, which are relieved 
as the traveller advances by high table lands and quadrangular-shaped 
eminences that disclose their bare sides, ever and anon graced with lateral 
cedars and dwarf oaks ; and then the heaven-scaling summits that, in con- 
tinuous chain, oppose an impregnable wall upon the left, unite to define a 
broad-spread of undulating prairie, some eight or ten miles wide, well wa- 
tered and possessed of a good soil. 

The prevailing^ rock of this section appeared to be sandstone and lime* 
stone, intermixed with conglomerates of various kinds. 

I noticed two or three small ridges, several miles long, running parallel 
with the mountains at regular distances, in an uninterrupted course, pre- 
senting continued lines of thin strata planted vertically in their sharp 
crests, and reaching to an elevation of thirty or fortv feet, that, with broken 
fragments encumbering their sides, looked like the half-iaUen walls of some 
ancient fortification. 

Among several affluents of tlie Platte from the right, we crossed Crys- 
tal creek, a stream which derives its name from tlie existence af crystal in 
its sandy bed. I'his creek is tolerably well timbered and possesses a rich 
bottom of variable width, producing at the proper season a luxuriant growth^ 
of vegetation. 

Our horses being quite enfeebled from the fatifirue of travel, we gladly 
availed ourselves of the presence of bufl^o to prolong our stay at Cnerry 
creek some ten days, and meanwhile found no difficulty in procuring a con> 
tinned feast of good things from the dense herds that thronged the countij 
upon every side. 

25 



100 (STRATEGY OT WOLVE8. 

The seveie weather and freqneDt sdowb of the past two mnnthfl, had. 
driven these animals from the open prairie into the creek hottoma and 
mountains, whose vicinities were completely blackened with their coonllBsi 
thousands. 

The antelope, too, seemed to have congregated from all parts, and oovei^ 
•d the countrv in one almost mibroken hand. Their numbers eauseeded 
any thing of the kind I ever witnessed before or since. We amused ouiw 
aewes at times in shooting them merely for their skins, the latter being su- 
perior to those of deer or even sheep in its nicity of teztore and silky soft- 



One day, as was my custom, I left camp for the above purpose, and had 
noceeded but a short distance, when, happening upon a large band of ante- 
bpe, a discharge from my piece brought down one of its number. 

Before reaching it, however, my supposed victim had rejoined his com- 
panions, and the whole throng were lost to view almost with the speed of 
thought. 

The profuseness of blood that marked its trail through the snow, induced 
Be to follow it in expectation of soon obtaining the object of my pursuit ; 
but in vain. 

At length, after travelling four or five miles, I began to despair of sne^ 
cess, and, feeling weary, sat down upon the point of a small hill that com- 
manded a view of the surrounding prairie. While here an unusual stir 
among the wolves attracted my attention, and I amused myself by watch- 
ing their movements. 

Upon a neighboring eminence some fifty or a hundred of these insatiate 
marauders were congregated, as if for consultation. Adjoining this, two 

Sarallel lines of low hills led out from the river bottom into the prairie, for 
ve or six miles, defining a narrow valley, at the extremity of which a 
krge band of antelope were quietly grazing. 

The chief topic of the wolfine conference seemed to have particular re- 
ference to this circumstance ; for, in a very short time, the council dis- 
persed, and its members betook to the hills skirting the valley before de- 
scribed, and, stationing themselves upon both lines at regular intervals, 
two of them commenced the attack by leisurely approaching their destined 
prey from opposite directions, in such a manner as to drive Uie whole band 
oetween the defile of hungry expectants. This done, the chase began 
without further preliminary. 

Each wolf performed his part by pursuing the terrified antelope till re- 
lieved by his next companion, and he by the succeeding one ; and so on, 
alternately ; taking care to reverse their course at either extremity of the 
defile — again and again to run the death-race, until, exhausted by the inces- 
sant eflbrt and crazed with terror, the agile animals, that were wont to bid 
defiance to the swiftest steed, and rival the storm-wind in fleetness, fell 
easy victims to the sagacity of their enemies. 

1 watched the operation until several of them yielded their lifeless car- 
eases to appease the appetite of their rapacious pursuers, when I returned 
to camp with far more exalted ideas of the instinctive intelligence of wolves 
(savoring so strongly of reason and calculation) than I had previously en- 
tBTtained. 



ANIMAL FOOD CONDUCIVE TO GENERAL HEALTH. ^H 

Two or three severe snow-storms occurred shortly after oar arrival; but 
having constructed commodious sliantees in regular mountain style, witk 
Iai]genres in front, we were both dry and comfortable. 

These occasions, too, aflbrded their own amusement. Snugly stowed 
away in bed, with our rilQes at hand, whenever a straggling wolf ventured 
within gun-shot, in fond hopes of a deserted camp, he was almost sure to 
Ml a victim to his own temerity. 

Bands of five or ten would frequently approach almost to the camp-fire, 
totally unsuspicious of danger till the sharp crack of a rifle told the fall of 
some one of their number. 

A swarm of ravens, allured by the carcases of these animals, peopled 
the grove near by. Having devoured the timely feast, still the poor birds 
remained, making the day dismal with their tireless croakings, as if in im- 
portunate supplication for a further boon. 

Three of them soon became quite domesticated, and would approach fear- 
lessly to the very verge of the camp-fire in quest of the offiils of our culi- 
nary department. 

One, however, by far exceeded his two companions in boldness, and 
would venture within a few feet of us at any time. 

So audacious was his conduct, and so insatiate his appetite, his comrades 
took occasion to bestow upon him frequent chastisements ; but all to no 
purpose. At length, abandoning all hi:pe of eflecting the desired reforma- 
tion, they set upon the offending bird, nor relinquished their purpose till 
the life of the luckless gormandizer had expiated the crime of his unraven- 
like conduct, and his executioners were left to enjoy their daily repasts with- 
out the annoyance of hi6 presence. 

Jan. I6th, 1843. Having received an accession of three men to ovx 
number, from Fort Lancaster, we removed some six or eight miles further 
ilown the Platte, and camped in a large grove of cottonwood upon the 
light bank. 

At this place it was our daily practice to fell two or three small trees for 
( ur horses, as we now consiaered ourselves fully established in winter 
quarters. Game was plenty, and wood abundant ; nothing, therefore, re- 
mained for as to do but to recruit our horses, eat of the best the prairie af- 
forded, drink of the crystal waters that rolled by our side, and enjoy life in 
true mountain style ; nor did we neglect the opportunity of so doing. In 
fact, had the world been searched over, it would have been hard to find a 
jollier set of fellows than we. 

The efibrt of a few hours was sufScient to procure a month's supply of 
tlie choicest delicacies, nor is it marvellous that, to use a cant phrase of 
t!ie country, we soon became "/a/, ragged, and saucy*^ 

Perhaps nothing is more conducive to good health than animal food. In^ 
proof of this I need only to refer to the imiform good health of those sab- 
fiisting entirely upon it 

Sickness of any kind is rarely known to the various Indian tnbes con 
fined exclusively to its use* These people almost invariably live to a^i tp^ 



292 SOUHD SLEEPING. 

tnordiiiary age, anless cat off by the rayages of war or some unforeseen 
event. Uonsumption, dyspepsy, colds, and fevers, are alike strangers to 
them. 

The same observation holds good in regard to the whites who reside in 
this country and subsist in a similar manner. 

I have known confirmed cases both of consumption and dyspepsy 
cued by visiting these regions and submitting exclusively to this mode of 
living. 

For my own part, I felt not the least indisposed during the entir 
period of my stay, nor did I even hear of an instance of death from 
liatural causes in the mean time, and but rarely of a case of sick- 
ness, however slight The same also has been repeatedly remarked in 
my hearing by persons who have resided here for ten or twelve years, 
•nd whose united experience corroborates my own. 

A further fieust, relative to the teeth, is worthy of note in connection 
with this subject These never sufler by decay or aches, when em- 
ployed only in the mastication of flesh ; or, at least, I have never seen or 
Leard of an instance of the kind. 

I am, therefore, led to conclude from the foregoing facts, that animal 

food is in every respect the most wholesome and mnocent diet which 

\ can be 



A person in the enjoyment of good health and a quiet mind, generally 
deeps sound. In proof that such was the case with our party, I need only 
advert to a circumstance which here occurred. 

Having awoke one moonshiny ni^ht, and observing an unusual number j 
of wolves in tlie vicinity of camp, I seized my rifle ar3 shot one of them; 1 
soon after I improved the opportunity to lay another prostrate, and in a few 
minutes subsequent a third fell in liCe manner ; all at three several shots. 

A continuation of the sport seemed likely to detract too much from the 
liours of sleep, and so, placing the victims in front of the camp-fire, I ad- 
dressed myself to repose. 

A light snow fell in the interval and sunrise found us all in bed, patiently 
waiting to see who would have the courage to rise first At length, one 
man jumped up and turned to renew the fire. On noticing the wolves 
before it he wheeled for his rifle, in his eagerness to secure which be fell 
sprawling at full length. 

^ Hello !*' says one ; ** what's the matter, my boy. Is that are a sample 
of the ups and doums of life 7" 

" Matter ?'' exclaimed our hero, gathering himself up in double-quick 
time, and rushing for his gun ; " matter enough ! The cursed wolves have 
STown so bold and saucy, that they come to the fire to warm themselves ! 
Only look ! A dozen or more of 'em are there now, in broad day-light ! 
Get up, quick ! and let's kill 'em !" 

Aroused by this extraordinary aimouncement, the whole «osse were in- 
■tantly on their feet to repel the audacious invaders ; when, lo ! the cause 
of ahurm proved three dead carcases. 

But, where did they come from 7 When were they killed 7 Who placed 
them there 7 These were questions none were able to solve, and in regard 
to which all were profoundly ignorant Finally, the circumstance occar 



• • • • 

• • • • < » 



• • • • 



• •' 



• •• • 

• • • • 



• • • • 



, « 



r * * 
• # • • 



ABOUT BEAVER. 2d5 

sioDed qhite an animated discussion, which was socm meiged into a>npy 
''' "~ ; and, after amusing myself awhile at their expense, I unraveSad 



the mystery, to the surprise of all. 
'* Can it be possible r was tl 



the general exclamation^ — ** can it be possible 
that we should have slept so sound as not to hear the report of a rifle fired 
three times in succession, and under our very ears, at that!" 

** This reminds me," said one, ^ of dreaming that somebody fired dn* 
ring the night. But it seemed so much like other dreams I had forgotten 
it till now." 

. ^ Weil," retorted a second, ** we are a pretty set of customers to live 
in a dangerous country ! Why, a single Indian might have come into camp 
and killed the whole of us, one after another, with all the ease imaginable !" 
The above incident induced the narration of a circumstance, happening 
to an individual of my acquaintance two or three weeks previous. 

He had been into the mountaios after deer, and was on his return to 
the Fort for a fresh supply of ammunition, and, having occasion to camp out 
at night, like a genuine mountaineer, he took his saddle for a pillow. 
This, being covered with raw hide, excited the cupidity of a marauding 
wolf. 

The hungry beast felt ill-disposed to let slip an opportunity thus favora- 
ble for appeasing his appetite with a dry morsel, and so, gently drawing it 
from beneath the head of the unconscious sleeper, he bore off his prize 
to devour it at his leisure. 

In the morning our hero awoke minus saddle, and nothing save a num- 
ber of wolf-tracks at his head furnished clue to the mystery of its dis>»p* 
pearance ; and, after spending several hours in fruitless search, neither 
iude or hair of it could be found. 

In the river bank near camp were two lodges of beaver, whose saga- 
cious occupants gave frequent indications of their industrious habits by 
the magnitude qf their performances. Several trees, ten or twelve inches 
in diameter, had been freshly felled by them to furnish their families 
with food. 

In such operations they exhibit an instinctive intelligence well-nigh ap- 
proaching to reason. They uniformerly select trees that st^nd above 
their lodges, in order to avail themselves of the current in conveying their 
timber to the destined place of deposit. 

When a tree is thus chosen, the cautious little animal first carefully 
notices the point towards which its top inclines, and then sets himself to 
work at the opposite side. As his task approaches its completion, he fre- 
quently retires a short distance to observe the direction in which the tree is 
likely to fall, by watching its motions, and renews his labors with great cau- 
tion. Upon the first indication of the JlncUe, like an experienced woodsman, 
he instantly withdraws beyond the reach of danger, and leaves the tottering 
forest- monarch to announce his fallen greatness in the awful crash by 
which he is bespread upon the ground. 

The process of chopping is then performed by severing the trunk into 
blocks, some three feet in length, suitable for transportation, which are 
severally taken to the ^ slide " and rolled into the stream, by the cunning 



296 HUNTDfG EXCURSION. 

animal—msiiiff his tail as a substitute for hands. As they fall one alter 
another, he pfunges in and guides them to their destination, where they 
are safely moored for future use. 

The beaver possesses grreat strength in his tail, which is twelve or fif- 
teen inches long, four broad, and a half inch thick. This part of the ani- 
mal is highly esteemed by trappers, and assimilates a fish in taste, though 
it is far superior to any of the finny tribe. 

His teeth are very sharp, (incisors,) two inches or more in length, pe^ 
fectly round and of a uniform size, with the exception of the cutting 
extremities, which are gouge-like, about the eighth of an inch in diameter, 
and nearly in the shape of a semicircle. 

Beaver lodges are commonly constructed in holes carefully excavated ia 
the banks of streams, in such a manner that the entrances are entirely 
covered by water. It is very rarely they build in any other manner, not- 
witlist^iuding most writers upon this subject assert the contrary. 

The female usually produces two, and sometimes three, at a birth, but 
seldom rears more than one ; — ^first destroying the least likely, she bestows 
much attention upon her favorite ofispring, and nurses it with great tender* 
ness. 

The character and habits of this curious animal, in other respects, have 
probably met the reader's eye through other sources, so that a more ex- 
tended notice under this head would be unnecssary. 

Having procured a fresh supply of ammunition from Fort Lancaster, 
■ome two weeks succeeding our arrival at this place I visited the moan- 
tains on a hunting excursion, in company with a single voyageur. 

Our course lead up Vasque's creek for fifteen or twenty miles, to a ridge 
of high table land, through which we passed, by a circuitous route, and 
were ushered into a broad and beautiful valley, bounded upon the east by 
the ridge before named, and on the west by a lofty mountain chain. 

Vasque's creek is well timbered, and has a rich bottom, averaging one 
mile in breadth, and is skirted by a slightly undulating prairie, quite pro- 
ductive in various kinds of grasses. 

This creek is from eight to ten yards wide, and affi)rds a body of water 
more than a foot in depth. It heads in the main chain of the moun 
tains, where it claims a valley of considerable extent, enclosed upon al 
sides by lofty ridges that preclude the possibility of approach, except a 
two points marking an Indian pass to the waters of Grand river. 

From thence it winds its way between long defiles of mountains, tha 
dose in abruptly upon its very water's edge, till it finally intersects thi 
valley first spoken of, and forces itself through the high ridge of table land 
into the open prairie. 

Finding an abundance of deer in the vicinity, we struck camp and made 
It our hunting-ground for the time being. Our efi&rts were very success- 
ful, and seldom a favorable day passed without giving us the skins and 
choice parts of two or more deer. 

Nothing occurred to mar our enjoyment for the first two or three weeks, 
•t which time my comrade, having unfortunately broken his gun-lock, wai 



MIRACIILOI78 E8CAFE. 297 

CDmpelledto retmn to the Fort for lepaiiB. I reaohed, however, to lemain 
9oio, despite his entreaties to the contraiy. 

This was the first trial I ever made of hennit-life, and I must confess, 
that after the &st sensations of repulsive loneUness had been overcome, I 
felt much attached to it, as subsequent pajges will prove. 

Yet there was something so forbidding in the idea of my real situation, I 
seldom reverted to it without experiencing feelings of gloomy apprehen- 
sion. Nor need it be wcmdered at, removed as I was far away mm friendly 
aid, and in a dangerous countiy, with a thousand terrific scenes awaiting 
me at every step. 

Still, in a little time I learned to forget all this, and roamed as freely by 
day, and slept as soundly by night, as though surrounded by friends and 
guarded by hosts of armed men. 

But the reader must not infer from these remarks that I had settled down 
in a state of careless security, for I took especial care a all times to avoid 
surprise, by close attention to certain indications which my own observa- 
tion had taught me to regard as the general precursors of danger from a 
savage foe, in order, by a timely movement, to escape a contact so fraught 
with penl. 

For several nights I had a constant visitor in the shape of a prairie-fox,— 
a creature about twice the size of a large red squirrel. He came to ap- 
pease his hungcer from the small scraps of esculents that lay scattered 
about camp, — cfevouring them while seated composedlv by the fire. 

My stocK of provisions was usually secured, at ni^ht, by substituting it 
■for a pillow ; but Mr. Reynard soon became so emboldened that he repeat* 
edly took occasion to help himself, even at the risk of sundry cufis it was 
my wont to bestow upon him whenever his eagerness led him to deal too 
Kmghly with my hair. 

Two incidents of perilous adventure occurred during this interval, 
which are perhaps not unworthy of narration. 

One day, having proceeded farther from camp than was my custom with- 
out finding game, towards night I came to the broad escarp of a mountain, 
covered with scattering pines, and ascended to its summit in hopes of en- 
countering deer or sheep, as the place gave indications of both. Here I 
stood at the very verge of a vast precipice, some four or five hundred feet 
high, overlooking* a narrow valley, counter-scarped by a rough mountain 
chain, where a large band of elk were quietly grazing. The sifi;ht appeared 
so tempting I was unwilling to forego the opportunity of giving them a 
passing shot. 

But how to get at them was the question. To go aroand the hill would 
require a detour of some six miles, and consume too much time, as the day 
was fast closing. Unless some means could be found enabling me to de- 
scend the wall, it was evident I must abandon my design. 

Accordingly, after a short search, having found a ravine-like pass, worn 
by the rains axid fiedling rock, that apparently led to the valley below, I atp 
tempted a descent 
• The breakage was steep and narrow, and the loose fragments and de^ 



298 « GETHN DOWN STAIRS.'* 

rilus from the crags above, rendered a foot-hold quite insecure. Yet I 
progressed without much difficulty, and began to congratulate myself on 
an anticipated speedy exit from seeming danger, when, coming suddenly to 
an abrupt precipice, of sixty or seventy feet perpendicular descent, and 

Sved far around its base with sharp rocks presenting their keen edges 
:e so many hatchets set on end, I was thrown all aback at the appalling 
spectacle. 

In va n I tried to retrace my steps. The sides refused to sustain my 
weight, and the yielding surface, to wnich I clung with a death-like tenacity, 
threatened every moment to plunge me headlong from the frightful steef^ 
to be dashed in pieces among the rocks below. 

That moment was an awful one ! Retreat was impossible, — advance 
was certain death, — ^the time for reflection was fast waning, for every in* 
Btant brought me nearer and still nearer to the fatal verge ! 

It was then I bestowed a fleeting thought upon loved and absent fnends, 
—one fleeting thought upon a far distant home and all the cherished end6a^ 
ments of childhood, — and, commending my soul to the Great Author of its 
existence in a brief prayer, I turned to gaze calmly upon the yavraisg 
jaws of fate that awaited my speedy destruction. 

But here a ray of hope burst from the thick cloud which till now seemed 
just ready to merge the sun of existence into the density of its own dark- 
ness. 

A tall pine grew at the base of the precipice, some fifty yards distant^— 
two narrow shelves of protruding rock, six or seven feet apart, led towardi 
the tree, affording a sufficient hold for hands and feet to a person stando^ 
at full length. 

My decision was instantly formed. Carefully dropping my rifle from the 
steep, by dint of great exertion I gained the shelves, that seemed as if 
made expressly for an occasion like the present ; — ^then, by moving late> 
ally, inch by inch, along the dizzy side, in a short time I had progressed to 
Hhe tree, whose topmost branch lay just within my reach. Grasping tlra 
firmly in one hand, and disengaging the other to be used as the emergency 
might require, I threw myself backward among the surrounding boughs, 
ano^ lodging in safety, was left to descend at leisure the remaining dis- 
tance. 

Once more upon a suro footing, the occurrences of the day had proved a 
sufficient gorge to present ambition ; so, seizing my rifle, (which had luck- 
ily fallen uninjured.) I bade farewell to the unconscious elk and returned 
to camp. There, with early night I found myself transported to the kind 
of dreams in the drowsy car of sleep. 

But, instead of wild beasts and prowling savages thirsting for blood, 
such as the danger of my lonely situation would naturally inspire, my 
mind was filled with visions of deep chasms, fnghtful precipices, and yawn- 
ing steeps, that seemed to meet me at every turn, aflbrding no possible way 
of escape; and thrice glad was I when wakeful morning chased these 
horrid phantoms far away, and revealed to me the welcome reality of 
conscious safety. 

Soon after the adventure above related, another transpired of a somewtel 
atmilar nature 



• GEOLOGICAL REMABKS. 299 

The ragged mountain chain forming the western bonndary of the val- 
ley, affi>rded numerous black-tailed deer and sheep. The suns of these 
animals being much larger than those of the common deer and antelope, I 
was induced to scour the vicinity, occasionallv, in pursuit of them. 

One day, having ^ne to a considerable distance on this errand, I was 
passing along upon me crest of a sharp peak, of great height and steep 
sides. 

The ridge ranged from northwest to southeast, leaving upon its right 
side a vast spread of smooth snow, encrusting it from summit to base, and 
upon its left, a lateral vaUon, entirely bare and graced with frequent spots 
of CTass, as yet green and flourishing. 

One of these niches was occupied by a band of wild sheep, which were 
80 situated they could not be successfully approached, unless from the op* 
posite side of the peak. Attempting this, I was proceeding slowly along, 
Dv means of steps implanted in the thick crust with the breech of my 
ime, and had almost attained the point designed, when, losing foot-hold^ I 
fell prostrate, and, after gliding the distance of a full mile, almost with the 
speed of thought, found myself immersed in a huge bank of loose snow, at 
foe foot of the mountain. 

It is all nonsense to talk of steam-boats and rail-road cars, in comparison 
with the velocity of such a lofty specimen of '* gettin down stairs !' Few 
mortals, I may venture to say, ever got along in the world half so fiist as 
did myself in this grand avalanche from the mountain-top. 

The country contiguous to this valley is fi;enerally possessed of a very 
good soil, both in the prairies, table lands, and mountains. Bordering upon 
the watercourses, the surface discloses a deep mould of sand and gravel, 
exceedingly fertile, reposed upon a substratum of granite and micaceous 
sandstone ; the prairies presented a mixed supernce of sand, clay, and 
gravel, rather thin and light, and strongly impregnated with various salts, 
— and the table lands, a compound of stifl* clay, stone, and gravel, partially 
enriched by the fertilizing properties of vegetable and animal matter and 
the genial auxiliaries of disintegrated rock, with now and then a diminu* 
tive spot destitute of grass or nerb and whitened by a thin coating of sa- 
Une efflorescence. 

The prevailing rock is sandstone, granite, gneiss, limestone, and large 
boulders of the primitive formation. 

The only indication of minerals, so far as my observation extended, was 
that of iron, though doubtless due research would bring to light a rich sup 
ply of other valuabls ores. 



300 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

Retnin to the Fort— Texan recruiting officer.— New plani. — Yolimteer. — ^The CbuM 
Shot, or Special Providence. — ^Texan camp. — Country contiguous to the Arkanm, 
from Fountaine qui Bouit to the Rio de las Animas. — Things at rendervouB.— A 
l^ce at the company. — Disposal of force. — March up the de las Animas.— Hie 
country ; Timpa valley, and its adjoining hills, to the de las Animas. — The latter 
■tream ; its canon, valley and enchanting scenery. — Tedious egress. — UnparaUded 
rafiering from hunger, toil, and cold." Wolf flesh and buffido hide. — PainAil oon- 
flequences of eating cactL — A feast of mule meat after seven days' starvation.— 
Camp at the Taos traiL — The adjacent country.— Strict guard.— A chase.— Tbt 
meet reward for Treason. 

On the 16th of Feb., my stock of ammunition having failed, I proceeded 
to Fort Lancaster for a fresh supply, where I encountered a Texan reeroit- 
ing officer, sporting a Colonel's commission, that bore the signature of 
** Sam Houston,'* President of the Republic 

The object of this personage was to raise a company of volunteer rifie* 
men, to act in conjunction with a large force said to be then on its way for 
the invasion of Santa Fe. The main design of the expedition was to annoy 
the Mexican frontier, intercept their trade, and force them, if possible, to 
some terms by which a peace might be secured between the two countries. 

The proposed rifle company was to be vested with discretionary powers, 
and penorm the duties of a scouting party to the main army. Each of its 
members was to be regularly enlisted for the term of nine months,— firmed 
with a good rifle and pistols, and mounted upon a stout, serviceable horse. 

Great inducements, by way of promises, were also held out, to secure a * 
prompt and ready enlistment ; and, in fact, the whole affiur was represented 
in a light so favorable, few possessed of the necessary means for equipping 
themselves refused to enter their names upon the muster-roll, and raUj ! 
beneath the banner of the Lone Star. i 

One thin^, however, served to awaken in the bosom of each the genuine ' 
martial spirit, more than all the eloquence of the fluent Colonel ; — ^this was i 
the unfurlment of the identical flag, bullet-pierced and tattered, that had 
stood as the genius of victory at the sanguinary battle of Corpus Christi, in 
the early days of the Texan revolution. 

Who could refuse to respond favorably to a call backed by arguments so 
potent 7 — not L 

Soon after Colonel Warfield, for such was the officer's name, set out on 
his return to the scene of intended operations, accompanied by some twelve 
or fifteen men, having named for his rendezvous a point witnin the Mexi- 
can territory, near the confluence of the Rio de las Animas and the waters 
of the Arkajisas. Circumstances were such at the time it was inconve- 
nient for me to leave, and eight or ten days intervened before my departure ti 
join the expedition. 



NO FANCY SKETCH. 301 

Meanwhile, it stormed almost incessantly, and the prairies presented 
ranght save one vast expanse of gloomy desolation covered with deep an! 
trackless snow. 

The distance to be travelled was not far &om two hundred miles, through 
a coantry inhabited only by wild beasts and strolling savages. Yet, no- 
thing daunted by the cheerless aspect of aflkirs, having completed my ar- 
tangements, I improved the first iair day to launch forth upon the drear 
waste. 

Relying upon the great abundance of game usually encountered en rotOet 
I took but a small supply of provisions, as, fully equipped, with rifle, pistols, 
bntclier-knife, and other requisites, I mounted my horse, and, solitary and 
alone, commenced the long journey before me. 

Hurrying on as fast as 3ie nature of the case would admit, in the after- 
noon of the second day, an object, several miles in advance, arrested my 
attention. Suspicious of danger, but anxious to know its character and ex- 
tent, I cautiously approached and was jgratified to find it, instead of the 
larking savage my imagination bad depicted, a white man, hastening with 
eagerness to greet me. 

He was on foot, and looked way-worn and weary to a deplorable extent 
His story was soon told. He was the bearer of despatches from the Arkan- 
sas to Colonel Warfield, — and being compelled to abandon his mule by the 
way, on account of the depth of snow, had proceeded thus far on foot, and^ 
for the last three days had been without eating, in tiie tedious performance 
of the duty committed to his trust. 

Hearing this, I invited him to a creek near by, where I immediately 
struck camp, and laid before him my small stock of eatables, with the as- 
taxance it was at his disposal. 

The speedy disappearance of the scan^ supply; attested the keenness of 
his appetite, and left us both in a state of utter want. 
, On learning that Colonel W. had left for the Arkansas several days 
since, and now most probably had reached his destination, my new ac- 
quaintance concluded to retrace his steps and bear me company. 

The next morning we arose breaklastless and resumed our jouhiey, 
trusting to a kind Providence and our rifles to meet the demands of nature. 
But the snow became deeper the farther we advanced, and prospects more 
and more gloomy at every step. 

Not a living creature presented itself to view, nor even the least vestige 
of any thing possessing the breath of life. Beforo and around lay a vast 
spread of winter-bleached desolation, bounded upon our right by the distant 
mountains, whose towering summits pierced the blue heavens and laughed 
at the clouds and storms below, while in front, and rear, and on our left, the 
curving horizon alone gave limit to vision. 

Still hope bade us advance, although difficulties continued to multiply in 
threefold ratio. The second and third day our progress did not exceed 
twelve miles, and yet we had gone so far retreat or sulvance seemed alike 
hopeless. 

Starvation stared us in the face, and continued travel through snow^ 
ofttimes waist deep, reduced our strength and wasted our spirits. 
On the fourth day, however, the weather having become more £BivoFable« 

26 



MS THE CHANCE SHOT. 

we were enabled to make further lieadway than the preceding one. We 
■liio saw a few ravens, but they, as if conscious of our desperate conditioa, 
cantioasly avoided coming witliin gun-shot ; — a big rabbit likewise showed 
itself in the distance, but, being at the top of its speed, disappeared almo$<t 
ai soon as seen ;-^thu8 we were again doomed to ^o supperiess to bed and 
feftst upon the well-furnished -tables of dreams, which, though they please 
the fiincy during their continuance, serve only to increase the appetita 
and stimulate its cravings. 

On the morning of thc» fifth day, as we arose to continue our journey, 
determined to hold out as long as possible, the haggard looks of my com- 
rade excited my compassion, and wishing to cheer him, I observed, 

** Well, what would you think were I to predict for us a good supper to- 
night V 

^ Really,*' said he, ** I don't know. But there's a poor show for its ful- 
filment, any how." 

*'We shall have one, I know it" 

" God send we may. But, pray, where is it to come from. 

^ I am quite confident we shall find game. If so, as my rifie bears the 
a4me of Oljl Straightener, and it has dever been known to fail in a case ol 
emergency, I know she will maintain her ancient honor." 

" What if we don't find game 1 Then how." 

** Why, here's my horse. It will be of no service to me if I am to die 
from starvation. In case we find nothing, its carcase shall save our lives." 

^ Horse meat or any thing else wouldn't go bad, just at this time." 

Thus resolved, we continued our way, plodding along in gloomy silence, 
brooding over the sad realities of our deplorable situation,— ever and anon, 
•canning the vacant expanse, in the fast-waning hope of looked-for relief, 
-—but as yet looked for in vain. ^ 

The day was fast verging to a close, and I was summoning a sufficien- 
cy of fortitude to submit to the sacrifice of my favorite beast, and ruipi- 
nating upon the many difficulties and inconveniences that must result 
from such a step, volving and revolving al^ the pros and cons the case 
admitted of, when I was roused from my reverie by the shrill voice of my 
comrade, who joyfully exclaimed, 

**Look ! — look ! A buffalo !"— at the same time pointing in the direc- 
tion it appeared. 

I looked, and sure enough a venerable old boll presented himself a few 
hundred yards to the right. 

" Aye, aye, my hearty ! There's a chance for Old Straightener !" said 
I, as, lowermg my rifle, I started towards the intended victim. 

'* Don't forgot," cried my comrade, ** that all my hopes of salvation arc 
centred in your rifle-ball." 

The animal was feeding quietly, and I was enabled to approach within 
some sixty yards of him, when levelling, I pulled trigger, — but the capi 
being damp, burst without a discharge. The noise caught the quick ear 
of the bulTalo, and caused him to look round ; — however, seeing nothing 
to excite his alarm, he soon resumed an employment more agreeable to 
his taste than needless vigilance. 

Having put fresh powcfer into the tube, and supplied it with another cap 
I was again raising to take aim, and had brought my piece nearly hal( 



NOnCE OP THE ROUTE. Mt 

diaalderwaxd, when it mieeremonioasly diecharsed itself bairing its bill 
in the ligluz of the bufialo — the very spot I should have selected had it been 
optional with myself. The old fellow staggered a few steps and/t^/ dead I 

My companion coming up, we soon completed the process of butchering, 
and, after furnishing ourselves witii an ample supply of choice beef, pro- 
ceeded to a neighboring creek, where, finding a few sticks of drift-wood, a 
fire was quickly kindled, and we ended our Jasi cf five mccessive days and 
wekls with feastmg and glad hearts. 

T have always regarded this event as a special Providence, and ever re- 
vert to it with no ordinary feelings of gratitude. Had the ball, thus accH 
dentally dischar^, missed the animal, or had it only wounded him, in aO 
human probability, becoming alarmed at the presence of danger, and 
prompted by the instinct common to the species, he would sobn have beea 
beyond the reach of pursuit, leaving me to the dernier resort of slaughter- 
ing^my horse or perishing among tl^ snows and chill blasts of the prairie. 

Enfeebled as we were from continued toil and suffering, we could have 
scarcely held out a day longer, and ev6n the partial relief a£R>rded by a 
poor supply of horse flesh, left, -as we would have been, to travel on foot and 
cany our beds, guns, and provisions, must have served only to prolong oar 
miseries a brief space, finally to meet the inevitable fate that threatened 
us ! as this solitaiy bufialo was the only living creature that met our view 
during tlie entire journey. 

I have never consented to dispose of the tough-looking piece long pre- ' 
viously christened " Old Straightener," and, when asked tne reason, have 
uniformly replied, ** It is the only gun I ever saw or heard of that has kill- 
ed game cf its ovm accord ! 

The second day succeeding this occurrence, my companion left me to ob> 
tun his mule, and I completed the remamder of my journey alone^ — arriving 
the appointed rendezvous late in the afternoon of the 20th of March. 

The country travelled over, from the Platte to the Arkansas, near the 
mouth of Fontaine qui Bouit, has been fully described in former pages. 

My route, from the mouth of this stream, followed the Arkans^ for some 
fotty miles. The landscape, back from the river-bottoms, was quite undu- 
lating, presenting upon the left a superfice of gravel, clay, and sand, mixed 
with vegetable matter ; and, upon the right, a light, sandy soil, somewhat 
sterile and unproductive. 

Many rich spots of a deep bluish loam meet the eye of the traveller, in- 
terspersed with spreads of naked sand, ox clay whitened by exuding salts, or 
clothed in dwarfish grass; among which numerous clusters of absinthe^ 
frequently five or six feet high, are seen in almost every direction. 

The country, as a general thing, is evidently ill-adapted to other than 
gnizing purposes. 

Two broad beds of sand-creeks are passed upon the left, a few miles be- 
low Fontaine qui Bouit, one of which is Black Squirrel creek, and the other 
is known as the Wolf's Den. Upon the right, the Rio San Carlos, Ccr- 
nna Virda, Apache, and Huaquetorie, after tracing their serpentine coursoe 
from the Taos Mountains, commingle with the Arkansas. 

Some six miles below the mouth of Fontaine qui Bouit are the rains of 



S04 PBIHART MOVEMENIS. 

in old fort, occn|M6d several years since by one Capt Gnmt as a tradinfr 
post 

The last of my course, being npon the side of the river, was much im« 
peded by mod ; and, although the surface was generally bare, travelling 
was even more tedious than it had been at any time hitherto. 

After a series of suffering and deprivation so continued aod severe, right 
gladly did I hail the Lone Sar banner upon the opposite shore, as their punt 
of present termination. 

Fording the Arkansas about a mile above the Texan encampment, I 
found it nearly swimming deep, with a swift and muddy current over a bed 
of quicksand and gravel. 

My appearance created no little surprise among all present, as they had 
several days since numbered me with those who had volunteered with 
great readiness, so &,r as pronmes were concerned ; but, when fsrfo&m- 
AHCEs were required, *^came up missing,** 

I must confess, however, to great disappointment in the diminutive force 
that here met my view, which consisted of only twenty-four men, includ- 
ing officers — all told. But several accessions were expected, suflcient to 
swell the number to fifty five or sixty. A party of eighty volunteers from 
the States were to meet us at the '^ Crossing of the Arkansas, on the 
Santa Fe trail, together with a detachment of two hundred and fifty frooi 
Texas ; and, with these reinforcements, it was confidently asserted we 
would be equal to the combined force of all New Mexico. 

I immediately reported myself to the commanding officer, and was kindly 
welcomed, with the remark, 

**Well, sir, you are just in time. Another day and you would have 
been too late. We move camp to-morrow morning. 

(A pity it was I had not been too late !) 

Witbdrawmg from the conference, the lapse of a few momente gave me 
an opportunity to look around and see among whom I had Mien. 

It would have been hard to scare up a more motley group of humanity in 
any place this side of Mexico. £ach individual presented a uniform as 
varied as the imagination could depict, though tallying well with the gene- 
ral appeai^ce of the whole company — ^it was a utitform of rags / 

Still from beneath the dusky visages, half obscured by beards to which 
the kindly operations of their razors had been for weeks and even months 
a stranger, I detected the frank expression indicating the generous- 
hearted mountaineer, and began to feel at home, notwithstanding the faist- 
rising feelings of regret that fortune had thrown me in their way. 

Early in the morning of the following day we were drawn up in line and 
divided into two detachmenter— one consisting of ten, and the other of 
fourteen men. The first of these, under the command of Colonel WarfieUi 
were to proceed to the Crossing of the Arkansas, and await the arrival 
of the main army, or otherwise act as circumstances suggested, while the 
second, headed by a lieutenant, marched up the Rio de las Animas to 
the Toas trail, to perform the duties of a corps of observation until further | 
orders. 

It was my lot to accompany the latter, and we pronqptly commenoed 
wiorement. 



DESCRIPTION OP THE DE LAS ANOLUS. M^ 

After riding a few miles we struck the Timpa, a small affluent of ifae 
Arkansas, up which we travelled till the next day about noon, when, coming 
to an Indian trail leading south-southwest to the de las Animaa, we follow- 
ed it and reached the latter stream on the a7th of March ; continuing up 
tiie de las Animas, three days subsequently we arrived at our destination. 

The country passed over at the conmiencement of our joumev, for fifteen 
or twenty miles, was a slightly undulating {Hrairie, of a sandy soil, with 
few indications of productiveness. 

The Timpa is entirely destitute of timber, and its valley, though plen- 
tiful in absinthe, is scarcely superior to the surrounding prairie. Sev« 
eral miles previous to leaving it, our course lay between two ridffes of 
forbidding and sterile hills, nearly destitute of vegetation, and affording 
only now and then a few scraggy cedars and shrubs. Indeed, but very lit- 
tle good land is found in this vicinity. 

C& diverging from the Timpa the trail crossed a high, arid prairie, 
which was furrowed by deep ravines, and ridged by long rolling hDls, 
that were oocasionally surmounted by cedars and pinions, until it struck 
the de las Aninuus. 

The watercourses through this section are rare, and sparsely timber- 
ed, being for the most ]Murt shut in by high banks of earth or lofty 
walls of precipitous rock, varying in altitude, and presenting vast chasms, 
passable only at certain points. Their valleys are narrow, but possess 
a fertile soil which is to some extent susceptible of cultivation, while 
many parts of the adjacent prairies might answer for grazing purposes. 

The prevailing rock, so mr as my (£servation eictended, was coarse- 
grained granite and limestone. I noticed at places along the oreek val- 
kys occasional spots o( calcareous earth ; and, in &ct, their soils general- 
ly indicated the presence of calcium in their compound, to no incon- 
aiderable extent 

The valley of the Rio de las Animas was by fiur the most interesting 
and romantic section of country we had as yet entered upon m the Mexi- 
can, or, as it is now claimed, Texan territory. This stream, in English, 
bears the name of Purgatory creek ; in French, it ia known as the Ptquer 
Veau, or Water of Suffering ; in Indian, it is called the Wild River, and in 
Sjpanish, it is christened by the term above used, which means the River 
ot Souls. 

It rises in the Taos Mountains by two separate heads, a little south 
of the Spanish Peaks, and emerges from its rugsed birth-place into the 
plains, where the two branches trace their way for some fifty miles and 
then unite to form one stream. These forks are passably well timbered, and 
Me skirted at intervals with rich bottoms ; but the circumjacent country is 
dff KoUing, and generally barren. 

A short distance below their confluence the river cuts its way through 
an expanse of high, barren table lands, for sixty or sixty-five miles, leaving 
abrupt walls of rock and earth on both sides, piled to a varied height ca 
tmn fifty to three or four hundred feet, surmounted fay groves of cedar and 
pinion, interspersed with broad pavements of naked rode, nude wasteb of 
stiff sun-baked clay, and occasional clusters 6f coarse grass* 

26* 



a06 AGONIZING CONDITION. 

Theee walla are often perpendiciilar, though they geDoially acdina 
acNnewhat, and are omamentea with scattering ahruba and cedus, which 
m vain seeic to hide the forbidding deformity of nature. 

They frequently intrude to the veiy water's edge, and pile at their feei 
add in the foaming current huge maaaes of rocl^ atrown about in all the 
wild disorder of savage scenery ; then, expanding at brief intervals, they 
pictur# many sweet, enchanting spots, that smile and bloom in unfading 
loveliness, where angels might recline, and, listening to the chime of their 
own voices, echoed trom rock to rock and reverberated with unheard-of 
melody, might fancy themselves in heaven ; then again closing, to open in 
like manner at some favored point, till they finally give place to a broad 
and beautiful valley, from one to three milea in width, of unsurpassed fer- 
tility, and abounding at the proper seascin in every variety of fruit and 
fbwer known to the country, which, mingling amid the the scattering cot- 
tonwoods, (free from under-brush and mimicing in their arrangement the 
reffttlarity of art,} seem to portray the fobled fields of Elysian bliss. 

This valley extends from the mouth of the canon to the junction of the de 
}aa Animas with the Arkansas— a distance of twenty-five or thirty miles i for 
ten or fifteen of which it is skirted with receding hills, that maintain their 
stem sublimity till they at length become swallowed up in the kr-spreading 
prairie. 

This is a favorite resort for deer, antelope, and turkey, which are found 
in great numbers, gambolling amid its varied beauties, or winding along iti 
narrow defiles and forbidden recesses. 

We entered the canon through a narrow and steep declivity, fiarmed by 
a small stream, which was shut in by continuous clifl^, that increased in 
height as they approached their lofty counterparts immuring the angiy 
river. 

After winding a day and a half among the cra^ and confused maniiet, 
which constantly intervened to impede our way, m vain searching for an 
egress, we found it impossible to proceed further, and were forced to climb 
the almost vertical bank, at an ascent of five or six hundred feet, — ^frequently 
lifting our horses over the rocks by means of ropes attached to their bodies 
and drawn from the impending aummit j — this tedious process occupied 
nearly a day in its completion, and left us upon the lateral table land ex- 
hausted in strength and worn down with fatigue. 

We were eleven days en route, during which time we suffered greatly 
Prom the severity of the weather, hunger, toil, and watching. 

The air was bleak, the winds coki^and piercing, and the sky almost 
continually over-cast with clouds, while two or three snow storms contri- 
buted their mite to swell the catalogue of comfortless hours. 

Our horses, too, had become so exhausted from hard fkre and prevlovB 
aorvice, we were necessitated to travel on foot for moat of the distance. But 
the grand climax of miseries was experienced through lack of food. 

A scanty supply of bufiy o meat, taken with us at the outset, was consumed 
at the next meat, and we were left without one morael to appease the gnaw- 
ings of appetite for tho two days and three nights succeeding. 

A atraggUng wolf that chance threw in our way, at the expiration of tfaif 



SPY CABIP. 30T 

time, most luckily furnished us with a breakfast, though nothing further 
entered our mouths till the morning of the third day from tins, when, com- 
ing to the site of a recent Indian encampment, we succeeded in gathering 
a few pieces of dry buffiilo hide, that hiy scattered about — so hard and too^ 
the wolves had tried in vain to gnaw them ; these, after being boiled Bom» 
twelve or fourteen hours, affiird^ as a paltry eabstitute for something bet- 
ter, but of so glutinous a nature it almost cemented the teeth employed in 
its mastication. . " 

The two days following we were again doomed to go hungry and began 
to talk seriously of the imminent danger of starving to death. 

This interval had brought us into the canon of de las Aminas, where, 
having struck camp, several of the men sought a temporary respite from 
the torments of hunger by eating roasted cacti; — the article at first tasted 
well, and from the recommendation of the essayists, several were induced 
to partake of it quite heartily. 

but the lapse of a brief hour or two brought with it the " tug of war," 
when the inherent properties of the eoc^t began to have their el&ct npoa 
the enervated systems of the participants. 

The painful consequences of this strange diet at first were a weakness^ 
in the joints, succeeded by a severe trembling and a desire to vomit, acconn 
panied with an almost Insufierable pain in the stomach and bowels. 

Three or four of the unfortunate sufferers were in such extreme pain they 
rolled upon the ground for agony, with countenances writhiiig in every im- 
aginable shape of frightful distortion. 

Hereupon it was decided to sacrifice one of our animals as a last resor^ 
which was promptly done, and we ended our fast of nearly seven days' con* 
tinaance with a feast of mule meat 

I had heretofore cherished a decided repugnance to this kind of food, bat 
am in justice bound to say, it proved both sweet and tender, and scarcely 
inferior to beef. The supply thus obtained lasted till we came among buf* 
falo, when ample amends were made for previous abstinence. 

The only game encountered during the march was an occasional band of 
antelope or wild horses, whose extreme vigilance and caution set at defi 
ance all attempts to approach them, and sported at the phrensy of our des- 
perate ef^rts. 



Our camp, at the termination of this arduous and eventful journey, 
in a small grove of cottonwood, about eight hundred yards below the point 
at which the trail, from Bent's Fort to Taos, crosses the right hand fork of 
the de las Animas. 

It was faced on the north by a broad sandy prairie, gently unidulating, 
that, at intervals, disclosed a good soil, and led to a distant ridge of pine-cliul 
hills ; while from the west, at a distance of some twenty or thirty miles, 
the proud aftd isolated summits of the Spanish Peaks, or Huaquetories, 
arose to view, and from the southwest, the lofty and noble tierras templada$ 
chat skirt the heads of the Cimarone and Colorado, Whose broad tops 
showed themselves in beautiful contrast with the sharp, snow-clad moun- 
tain forming the eastern boundary to the valley of Taos ; then, upon the 



^08 VCEWAXb OF TREASON. 



fiouth and east, a steep bank, twenty-five or thirty feet high, shat ns from 
the contigQons plain. 

While here, we kept strict and constant guard, in view of anticipated 
movements of the enemy, as, from certain information previously obtained, 
we knew him to be quartered in full force at the nearest settlements. 

Our daily and hourly expectation was to meet a detachment of the Mex- 
ican army, then out tor the purpose of reconnoitering ; and, weak as we 
were in point of numbers, we felt quite equal to a hundred such soldiers, 
«nd were anzk)us for a trial of arms. 

Our stay was prolonged for three or four weeks, and the abundance of 
^oice buflalo meat that continued to grace our larder, with the rank growth 
of fresh grass for the sustenance of our animals, imparted an air of cbeer- 
ftilness and thrift both to man and beast. 

Nothing occurred worthy of note during the interval, save the following 
incident. One day, late in the afternoon, our sentinels announced the ap- 
pearance of a small party of Mexicans at the crossing, and immediate pre- 
parations were made for an attack* Before these could be completed, how- 
ever, our expected , enemy was reported as having raised camp and being 
Mkely to escape by a precipitate retreat towards the Arkansas. Six men, 
mounted upon fleet horses, were immediately detached in pursuit, — of whom 
I was one. 

The chase continued for several miles, and terminated in our overhaul- 
ing three persons, — but, instead of Mexicans, two of them were Americans, 
wA the otner an Englishman, on their way to the United States with two 
pack mules heavily mden with gold and silver. 

On Receiving from them information^ of the disposition and probabls 
whereabouts of the Mexican forces, they were permitted to depart unmo- 
lested, — a circumstance not likely to have happened had we been the gang 
ef '* lawless desperadoes,^ so hideously depicted in several of the public 
prints of the day, as I have since learned. 

An item of the intelligence received through them, gave us niingled sen- 
Mtions of pain and pleasure. 

An European Spaniard, — ^who had made one of the Texan army in its 
unfortunate expedition against Santa Fe, in the fall of 1842, and had been 
retained a prisoner of war for a number of months subsequent, having ef- 
fected his escape to the Indian country,— on hearing of the recent move- 
ments of the Texans under Col. Warfield, had come and reported himself 
veady again to enlist. 

On the strength of this assurance he was partially admitted to amfideiuXi 
— a thing rarely to be reposed in any one of Spanish extraction. The re- 
sult was, that, after gleaning all the information circumstances would ad- 
mit of, he proceeded, post haste to Santa fe, and laid the whole affair before 
Qen. Armijo, the Mexican Governor, in hopes of a handsome reward. 

The old Governor, however, had received more exact intelligence, with 
the names and number of volunteers composing the party under Col. W^ 
(furnished him through the medium of certain Americans, base enough in 
nrinciple and sordid enough in motive, to act as his spies, for a paltry hribe 
m the shape of stipulated remissions of tariff duties on imported goods, etc.,) 
flmd treated the traitor to his cause quite cavalierly, — not hesitatinor to tell 



NATURE OF THE COUNTRY. 



309 



lum be lied, and even accuse him of being a Texan spy — threatemog to tiy 
and execnte him as such ! 
Were this ever the reward oftreasouy how few would be t&aitoxs t 



CHAPTER XXX. 



Maicli down the Cinmrone.-- Junction of the two divuions. — Country between tfaa 
de hs Animas and the Cinuurone. — Perilous descent — Canon of the Cimarone.^— 
Soil and prevailing rock. — k fort— Grandeur and sublimity of scenery. — Beauty of 
lOcfas. — Cimarone of the plain. — Fruits and game. — ^Wide-spread desolation.—- A 
dreary country.-— Summer oin the Desert — Remarks. — Encounter with Indians.^- 
Nature's nobleman. — ^Wild horses and diflerent modes of catching them. — ^Failuie of 
expected reinforcements. — ^March into the enemy's country. — Ancient engravings 
upon a rock. — ^Boy in the wolf's den. — A man lost— Forced march.— Tomient of 
thiiBt — Remarks. — ^The lost found. — Expulsion for cowardice, — its efiect 

Soon after the incident related at the close of the preceding chapter, an 
express arrived irom the Col. commandant, with dispatches ordering our 
division to join him at a small creek near the Pilot Buttes, or *^ Rabbit 
Ears," two noted landmarks situated some forty miles above the Santa Fe 
trail, and nearly equidistant between the Arkansas and Cimarone. . 

We accordingly took up our line of march and proceeded nearly due 
south for two days and a half, to the Cimarone ; thence, down the valley of 
the latter, five days' travel to the Santa Fe trail, and thence, west-north- 
west, one day and a half to the place of rendezvous, which we found with* 
(Hit difficulty after a journey of one hundred and seventy miles. 

Between the de las Animas and Cimarone, we crossed a long reach of 
arid prairie, slightly undulatins and generally barren, with the exception 
of small fertile spots among the hills, here and there, clothed with rank 

grasses* 

In some parts, the cacti so completely covered the ground that it was 
impossible to step, for miles in succession, without trading upon their 
sharp thorns ; in others, the thick clusters of absinthe monopolized the vi- 
cinity of creeks, nearly to the exclusion of all dissimilar vegetation ; and 
yet in others, though of more brief space, naked sterility refused foot t 
aught save gravel and stiff clay, or saline efflorescences. 

The water of most of the streams was so highly impregnated with mine- 
ral salts, it was often unfit to drink. The creeks afbrded very little timbexi 
and frequently none at all. 

The section immediately at the base of the high table lands to the right, 
exposed some beautiful spreads of fertile prairie, well watered and suitably 
timbered. The soil, as a whole, presented all the prominent character- 
istics of like portions of country previouslv described. 

The prevailing rock was limestone and sandstone, with various conglo- 
merates, and extensive beds of gj^psum. I noticed r orae very large speci- 



810 VALLEY OF THE CIMABpNE. 

mens of mica, of great beauty and transparency,— one, in particular, wis 
nearly a foot square, and two inches thick. 

The only indication of minerals coming under my notice, was iron and 
■alts ; though gold has been found in the immediate vicinity of the Hua- 
quetories, and silver in the neighborhood of the de las Animas, — some veiy 
nch specimens of the latter ore, said to have been procured in this region 
having met my observation* 

Near the Cimarone the country is very rugged and mountainous. Upon 
the ri^ht a lotly expanse of table land, aome eight hundred or a thousand 
feet high, leads far off till it becomes lost in the distance ; while, upon the 
left, the more elevated tierras templadas of the Colorado, gently curving 
from south to east, mark the division between the Cimarone and the latter 
stream. 

Every watercourse is inunured by caSons of craggy rocks that often 
preclude all access to it for many successive miles. The side-hills and 
prairie ridges, to some extent, are clothed with pines, pinion, and cedars ; 
and the creel^, whenever tiie narrow space of tneir prison-walls will per- 
mit it, afbrd beautiful groves of Cottonwood and thick clusters of fruit-beai^ 
ing shrubs and underbrush. 

Our courbO for a number of miles, previous to descending to the valley 
of the Cimarone, lay at the base of the table mountain on the right 

The entrance to this valley was by a narrow buflfalo trail, leading, down 
a |)erpendicular wail of clay and rock, sidelong^ in a shelf-like path, barely 
wide enough for a single horse or man to advance carefully, as the least 
misstep might plunge him down the abyss to be dashed in pieces upen 
the sharp fragments detached from the overhanging clifls. 

The wall^thus descended was from eight hundred to a thousand feet i& 
altitude, and faced by another of equal height at a distance of twenty-fifd 
or thirty yards. 

The spectacle was grand and awful beyond description. A rock, tiiat 
Droke loose about midway as we descended the pass, fell thundering down 
the frightful steep with a tremendous crash, and made the welkin ring 
as it reverberated along the vast enclosure with almost deafening clamor. 
I have witnessed many romantic and picturesque scenes, but never one 
so magnificently grand, so awe-inspiring in its sublimity, as that faintly 
delineiUed in the preceding sketch. 

Entering the canon at this point, after wandering a short distance among 
the huge masses of broken rock thrown from its towering sides, the travel* 
ler is ushered into a valley nearly a mile broad, shut in by mural moan* 
tains that rise to a varied height of from eight to fifteen hundred or two 
thousand feet, gradually expanding as he proceeds till it attains a width of 
from two to four miles. 

This valley generally possesses a very rich soil, sometimes of a de^ 
gravelly mould, and almost of vermilion-like color, assimilating the fiimoua 
redlanas of Texas, and, in appearance, equally fertile, — ^then, a dark brown 
loam obtrudes to view, sustaining a dense vegetation of lusty growth^-* 
and, yet again, a light sandy superstratum, affi>rding but small indicatioai 
of productiveness ; or dimniutive spreads of stiff clay, frowning ii^their 
own nudity ; or barren wastes, of less extent, that, in deep penitence fiw 



GRANl)EUR AND LOVELINESS. Wl 

their utter worthlessness, exude their briny tears in unremitting succession, 
which, as the solar rays strilce on them with kind intent to wipe away, 
spread o'er their parent surfaces bleached shrouds of shining salt. 

The latter part of this description, sofi&r as my observation has extended* 
will apply to nearly the entire valley of the Cimarone after it emerges from 
the canon. 

The place at which this romantic valley first attains its full width, is the 
confluence of a small tributary to the main creek, near an isolated sum- 
mit, that protrudes far out from the mountain range and commands the ap* 
proaches from either direction. 

This peak is five or eight hundred feet high, and inaccessible, except 
from the back ground by a gradual acclivity scarcely wide enough for two 
persons to ascend abreast The top presents a small area of level surface, 
securely defended by an enclosing wall of rock, five or six feet in height, 
rused at its brow evidently by the hand of art. A better position, in a 
miliary peint of view, for a fortification, is rarely found. Fifty men, suit- 
ably provisioned and equipped, might successfully defend it against an army 
of thousands. 

The rocks of this vicinity exhibit a more striking variety of color than 
aay I ever before witnessed. Theur predominant classification enumerates 
granite, sandstone (generaUy feriru^nous,) timestone, and slate. These 
^te disclosed in abrupt escarpments of several hundred feet altitude, or 
in isolated, quadrangular masses with vertical sides, assuming the appear- 
ance of gigantic fortifications, temples and palaces ; — or in a more multi- 
form aspect, now portraying vast walls with narrow basements, that, diveiv 
ging from the mountains, intersect the valley at intervals from side to side, 
except, perchance, at a well-formed gateway, — ^now, towering monuments, 
spires^ and pyramids, and again sculptured statues of men and beasts. 

All these magnificent representations are gorgeously decked with parti- 
oobred strata lying tier above tier, in regular order, some white, others 
biack, blue, brown, green, gray, yellow, red, purple, or orange, and so 
strangely intermingled that they cannot fail to excite the admiration of 
everr beholder. 

Tbe Cimarone rises in the range of table lands thirty-five or forty miles 
east-southeast of Taos, and, after following a serpentine course for nearly 
six hundred miles, empties into the Arksuisas some distance above Fort 
Gibson. As it emerges from the. mountains, (where it is a stream of con- 
iderable depth and a rapid current, confined to a narrow space between 
hij^h clayey banks, with a bed of rock and pebbles,) it expands to a great 
width, and, in a short distance, its waters become brackish and unfit for 
use, till they finally disappear among the quicksands, and leave a dreary 
waste of worse than emptiness, to mark the course of the transient vol- 
umes produced by the melting snows of spring and the annual rains of 
autumn. 

During its course through the Great American Desert, not a tree or 
shrub graces its banks. Its mountain valley, however, is ornamented with 
numerous and beautiful groves of cottonwood, that present among their 
underbrush a profuse abundance of plum, cherry, gooseberry, and cur- 
ruu bushes, with grape vines ; while the adjoining mils afford oak, pine, 
pinion, and cedar. 



S12 HOME OF DESOLATldN. 



#MWMM««<MK^<| 



Here also game abounds in great quantities, including, buffido, wiU 
horses, deer, antelope, elk, and turkeys. 

We frequentiy encountered four or five hundred head of wild horses in 
a single band, and turkeys showed themselves in every direction. 

The pleasant moonlight nights, that favored our journey through this 
delightful valley, were me source of great success in turkey-hunting, and 
tflbrded us no smaU sport Nearly every large cottonwood tree was occn- 
Died as a roost, and tne season as jet had not far enough advanced to 
nide its tenants amid the growing fubage. Each night, as the moon reached 
a suitable position, my practice was to seek out these perching-trees, from 
which I rarely foiled to return heavily hulen. 

One ni^ht myself and companion killed ten of these fowls— some of 
them having an inch thickness of pure fttupon the back. It is unnecesaiy 
to say that with such abudance, strewn so lavishly on every side, the fere 
upon our march adown this thrice^nchanting valley was one continued 
scene of sumptuous entertainment . 

But, loveliness gives place to arid sterility, and verdure to dresuy desolap 
tioD, as the traveller makes his exit from tne mountains. 

Almost the entire ej^nuise, from the Arkansas neariy to the Gulf of 
Mexico, an interval nnpue south-southeast, from fifty to two hundred miles 
in width, between longitucfes 100^ and 104'' west from Greenwich, is said to 
be littie else than a vast desert of barrenness, destitute of tree or shrub, 
or spire of grass relieve the aching eye, nor favoring stream with kindly 
flow to quench the fevered thirst 

The whole country is subject to \dfh. winds, that sweep over it at brief 
intervals in maddened fury, bearing in their course immense clouds of 
dust, and engendermg amid the waste landscape a scene of frequent change. 
To-day the wayfarer may find his nrogress impeded by no inconsiderable 
hills of loose sand, and to-morrow he may pass in the same direction and 
find a level prairie, — a feict not unaptiy expressed in the words of the 
Psalmist, **the mountains skipped uke rams, and the liole hiUs like 
lambs!" 

Between the Cimarone and the Arkansas, back from the watercourses, 
the prospect is but littie better. 

In the vicinity of the former are numerous spreads of rolling sand- 
prairie, if not entirely naked, but scantiy clothed with coarse, scattering 
ffrass, growing upon a surface so loose that a horse or mule will sink to 
fiis fetlocks at every step in passing over it ; then come broad reaches of 
slightiy undulating plains, mantied with sickly, dwarf vegetation, and sus- 
tained by a thin clayey soil, so baked and indurated by the sun as to be- 
come almost impervious to water. 

The snows of spring and the rains of autunm, as before hinted, aflbrd 
the only moisture ever known to these arid regions. Here dews, alike 
with transient showers, are entire strangers to the summer months, and 
•eave the scorching heat of a vertical sun to snatch the fieuling beauties of 
spring and turn their loveliness into stubble. 

The following lines, written upon the spot, as our littie party were about 
to witiidraw from this dreary solitude, but poorly portray some of the dit- 
nal realities then presented : 



SUMMER ON THE DESERT. 819 



SUMMER ON THE GREAT AMERICAN DESERT. 

Ye dreary plains, that round me He, 

So parch d with sammer's heat, 
No more ye please my wand'ring eye. 

Or woo my weary feet. 

Why hath the spring your beauty borne 

Into his hiding place, 
And left the widow'd winds to mourn 

The charms they would embrace ? 

Why should those flowers, whose honey'd bmth 

With incense filled the breeze, 
Droc^ing and withar'd, lie in death, 

And now no longer please ? 

That grassy carpet, green and wide, 

Why tum'd to stubble now ? 
Save 'chance along some streamlet's side, 
, Where less'ning waters flow ! 

And why those gently murm'ring rills, 

Whose soft melodious strains 
Were wont to echo 'mong the hills. 

No longer reach the pmins ? 

The lark no longer meets the mora,-— 

Nor linnet pours' his throaty — 
Nor feather'd warbler hails the dawn 

With his sweet, melloyr note ;*- 

Nor even insect cheers the scene, 

Where Solitude alone. 
In witlier'd garb, as Desert Queen, 

Rears her eternal throne i 

These thirsty plains, with open mouth. 

Implore the gentle shower ; 
But vainly plead, while summer's drouth 

In schorching heat doth pour ! 

Nor grateful shade, of spreadrag tree. 

Invites my feet to rest ; 
Nor cooling stream, in melody. 

Attempts my quicken'A zest. 

So dismal all ! why should I stay 

And sicken by their view ? 
Thrice gladly will I tarn away. 

And bid these scenes adieu ! 

27 



914 NATURE'S NOBLEMAN. 

The only inhabitants of this yart region are strollingr bends of bsflak 
and wild horses, with wolves, prairie dogs, and a few scattering antelope. 
The only human beings that visit it are Mexican traders and occasional 
war-parties of Pawnee, Apache, Knyawa, Cumanche, and Arapaho In- 
dians, and they only for the brief interval required in its hurried passage. 

Who, then, so wild as to suppose for a moment that such a country can 
ever become inhabited by civilized man ? — ^unless the time should tUerdlly 
be ushered in, when, to use the language of Scripture, *^ the desert sfaaU 
bud and blossom as the rose!" 

Late in the afternoon, towards the close of our journey, a little below the 
point at which the Santa Fe trail crosses the Cimarone, we cume upon two 
norses that appeared to have recently strayed from some travelling party. 
Aoeonting to the custom of the country anything encountered in this 
manner is good and lawful prize to the finder, and we forthwith set 
about taking possession. 

One of them, however, a two-year-old colt, proved so unmanageable 
we were obliged to kill it in order to secure the other. Being rather 
scantily suppfied with provisions, the fresh-slaughtered animal (fine and 
hi as it was) presented an opportunity too tempting not to be improv- 
ed in replenishing our stock, which induced us to encamp for that 
purpoee: 

Soon after a large party of horsemen made their appearance from 
over the neighboring lulls, and, having devoted a few minutes to recon- 
noitering, advanced upon us at full charge. In an instant our little 
force was drawn up in readiness to repel the expected attack. But, 
instead of enemies, the objects of our apprehension proved a squad of 
Arapahos, and they were accordingly allowed to come into camp. 

One of our visitors happened to be the owner of the two horses we 
had found, which, as he stated, (having described them minutely,) had 
straved from his village, some six miles custant ; he then enquired of us if 
we had seen them. Here was a dilemma ; should we deny the fact, and 
mn the risk of being caught in a falsehood ? or should we confess and 
abide the consequences ? Ouj* cbmmandant decided upon the latter course; 
but, in BO doing, had resort to an artful duplicity to bear upon the fine/ 
feeUnffs of the Indian, and replied : 

** My warriors had suflered long for lack of food. Three suns bad sunk 
behind the mountain, and not one morsel had entered their mouths to give 
them strength fortraveL In their distress they enquired of the Great 
Spirit, and He showed them the lost animals of my brother. 

*^ My warriors were not slow to receive the welcome gift. The flesh of 
the younger one hath caused us to bless the Good Spirit ; ^e other is with 
our own medicine-dogs, that mv brother may search for it no longer." 

The owner, on hearing this, looked very sorrwfuL The colt had been 
a favorite of his squaw and children. In a moment, however, he arosei 
and, extending his hand to the commandant, exclaimed : 

** My heart is good. My white brother did well to receive the gift of the 
Good Spirit, that his warriors might eat" 

Commandant. But the young medicine-dog of my brother was the be* 



JUNCTION FOBMED. *W 

lofed of his wife and litde ones. What will he that I give him ao they 
aonow not? 

Indimn. Now, my heart bleaaea the pale ftce* If he would bestow his 
gifts, what better could I receive at his hand than a small present of tobac- 
co^ that my pipe may be fiUed to the unifying friendship of him and his 
people. 

- A few pieces of tobacco were accordingly given, and the good.hearted 
Indian, after shaking hands with each one en our par^, took ms horse and 
departed to his village. 

Where, let me ask, do we find, in civilized countries an instance of noble 
geaeiosity equal to that of the poor savage ? x 

The Arapaho village, as we learned from our visitors, had been camped ^ 
in the vicinity several days, for the twofold purpose of awaiting the Cuman* 
ches and catching wild horses. This, by the way, reminds me of not hav- 
we as yet descril:^ the manner o( performing the latter feat. 
*^In taking wild horses, two methods are resorted to, alike displaying oon- 
SJdeiabLe tact and ingenuity. Of these the following is the most commcn: 

A large party of mlians, mounted on their fleetest chargers, having dis* 
oo'verod a band of these animals, carefully approach from the leeward, scatp 
terinff themselves to a distance of eight or ten miles along the course their 
iateoded captives are expected to run. This done, the chase is started at 
a given signal, by the nearest Indian, who is relieved by the next in sue* 
cession, and he by the next, and so on (taking their cue from the stratQcy 
of wolves in their capture of the antelope) until these proud rangers of the 
piaiiie, exhausted by their long«continued and vain efrorts to escape, cease 
to assert their native liberty, and ficill easy prey to the lasso of their 
pursuers. 

Another plan frequently adopted is, to erect a stout fence from side to 
aide, between two impassable walls of rock. The unsusjHcious band are 
then so started as necessarily to be driven within the enclosure, when their 
ready pursuers, closing in upon the rear, take than without the trouUe of 
% hmg chase. i 

Great numbers of wild horses are annually captured by these means, 
which become domesticated in a very short time. But, as a general thmg, 
they are less adapted to hard service than those reared in the ordinary 
way, and are &r more disposed to re-assert theur bfrthright of freedom / 
at the first opportunity that occurs. 

Our visitors communicated the important intelligence that a detachment 
of four hundred Mexicans had passed their village only two days previous, 
on its way to Arkansas ; which statement was further corroborated by cer- 
tain indications noticed in the trail. The enemy was evidently in pursuit 
of us, and, weak as we were numerically, none expressed any other feeling 
than that of a willingness to meet hinu 

From this camp, our course bore westruorthwest for thirty or forty mDes, 
durinjg which distance we found no vrater, and sufiered greatly from the 
agonizing effects of thirst One of our pack-horses, also, took the ** stom- 
fwi^" Mm ran off with his entire load, consisting principally of ammuni- 
tion, and all our efibrts to retake him proved abortive. 

About noon the succeeding day, we reached our destination, where a 



S16 INTENSE THIRST. 

junction was formed, not with the army we had hoped to find, bat with the 
mere handful who had parted from ns a few weeks since at the Arkansas. 

Discouragement and discontent were depicted upon the countenance of 
every one, as the lateness of the season admonisheMl us of the extreme un- 
certain^ of the arrival of expected reinforcements. The dreaded approach 
of the Cumanches, those unsparing enemies of the Texans, of whom we 
had received reliable intelligence, feu* more than the proximity of four 
hundred Mexican troops, gave us just cause for apprehension. A council 
was held forthwith, to decide upon the course proper to be pursued. Prur 
dence seemed to dictate an abandonment of our present position, — while 
the enemy were looking for us in another quarter, we might steal a march 
upon him in his own country. 

These suggestions gave tone to subsequent movements, and early in the 
rooming of the day following we were under way. For ton or fifteen miles, 
our course continued up tlie dry sand-creek that had marked our place of 
lendezvous, and the niirht following was passed with a few lodges of Ara- 
pahos, who were encamped at a small pool of water near a blulT bank of 
sandstone. 

This rock exhibited many rude engravings upon its smooth side, repra- 
flenting men, women, and children, dogs, snakes, and lizards, with various 
other devices, — evidently the work of ancient artists in commemoration 
of some remarkable occurrence connected with the former history of the 
country. 

I examined the sketch with deep interest, and felt as if glancing at the 
obscure records of the greatness and glory of some extinct nation, writ- 
ten in a language, like itself, now no lunger known. 

Our hunters, having accompanied tiie Indians to the chase, soon after 
returned with a choice supply of fresh meat, and four wolf pups. The 
Jitter had been taken by an Indian boy, three or four years old, who 
fearlessly entered the den, during the absence of the dam, and bore away 
her defenceless facnily in triumph. 

The next day saw us again en route. One of our men, having obtained 
pennission of the commanding officer, proceeded a short distance in ad- 
vance of the main party lor the purpose of hunting. Not paying strict 
attention to the course proposed, he mistook his way, and, despite our con- 
tinued efibrts to set him aright, could no longer be seen or heard of^ and 
we were at length reluctantly forced to give him up. 

Continuing up the creek some two days, we found it very difficult to 
procure water, and were often compelled to dig for it in the sand to a depth 
of three or four feet 

From this point, we bore south-southwest, and after more than a day and 
night's hard travelling, over an arid sand-prairie, favored by neither tree, 
shrub, nor watercourse, we arrived at the head of a small affluent of the 
Cimarone, inducting us to the bewitching scenery of the thrice lovely val- 
ley that lay immured within its giant walls. 

Thp fatigue of a forced march, combined with the^sweltenn? heat of an 
almotic torrid sun by day and scorching winds by night, in addition to thft 



DISCHAB6ED FOR COWAJWICE. 817 

indescribable lorments of burning thirst far nearly thirty hours, had ren- 
dered us almost frantic with agony. 

What tongue can tell the sweetness of the draught that firjst greeted onr 
parched lips, at the termination of this painful 'interval 7 What mind can 
conceive me inestimable value of water, until destitution unfolds its real 
merits? 

Hunger, one may forget in the sweet unconsciousness of sleep, or glut 
his appetite, meanwhile, upon the tasteless feasts of fancy, — but thirst, with- 
ering mirst, can never be forgotten while it continues^ — ^it will bum as if 
to scorch the vitals and dry up the heart's blood ! ^ 

Before leaving the sand-creek above alluded to, we passed several dimi- 
nutive bottoms and vaUons that assumed an air of fertility. In these, I 
noticed an abundance of the bread-root, and in the creek banks, two or 
three places gave indication of coal. The prevailing rock was sandstone 
and limestone. The country adjacent, with the exception of its being more 
tumiidous, is much like the Uanos peculiar to tlus region. 

On striking the Cimarone we contiued our march up its valley for some 
three days, and camped for a short time, to make a c^che of our surplus 
ba^age for the purpose of travelling with greater expedition. 

Tjie day preceding, however, anorded two incidents worthy of note. 
One was the re-appearance of our lost man, who, having found his way to 
this point, and knowing we must necessarily make it in our line of march, 
had been awaiting us for the past two days. He was hailed as one risen 
from the dead, and welcomed back to our midst. 

But the expulsion of three for cowardice almost immediately followed 
the re-Accession of one. Considerable dissatisfaction had existed for some 
time, in reference to our plan of operations. Several of the company had 
openly talked of desertion, and were using their earnest endeavors to per- 
suade others to this course. As we approached the enemy's country, the 
spirit of insubordination showed itself with increased violence. The time 
and place, even, were pitched upon for raisin? the standard of rebellion 
against all orders and those who gave them. Afiairs at length reached a 
crisis that loudly demanded a resort to some prompt measures to restore 
them to their proper equilibrium — an example must be had* 

Accordingly the company was drawn up in line, when the articles sub- 
scribed to by each of its members were read. This done, the commanding 
officer addressed the malecontents in a few brief words, demanding which 
of those articles he had violated, — if neither, they were equally binding as 
at first ; — ^then, alluding to the rumors that had reached his ears from various 
sources, he stated his readiness to release any one requesting it from further 
obligation, — ^but the discharge should be a dishonorable one, — a discharge 
for cowardice! 

" Yes," said he, " cowardice I We are on the eve of entering the ene- 
my's country, and the hearts of some doubtless begin to fail them. Texas 
wants no cowards to fight her battles ! None but brave men and true, are 
worthy of that honor ! Now, T repeat it, if any timorous spirit, — any pusil- 
lanimous heart,^-any despicable poUroon, wishes his discharge, I stand 
ready to give it; let lilm ste;) ore pa^^e in advanv-'p from the ranks and ac 

27 # 



S18 THE PUB8UIT. 



koowledee hunself a coward ! His name shall be erased from the omster* 

At this announcement, three men Stcfiped forward, and their names woe 
severally repeated, as they received their discharge, accompanied by tha 
catting wonis, — ^ retiBOih^cowardke /" 

After this the commanding officer again addressed them : ** Yon are now 
dishonorably discharged, and, as sentenced, before high heaven, I jHtmounce 
you cowari. If either of you considers this sentence unjust, let him shoul- 
der his rifle and choose his own distance. I stand ready to give him any 
satis&ction he may demand in reparation of his wounded honor. But, you 
shall pocket the disgrace. To-night you may stay with us. — ^to-moirow 
you must and shall leave. 

** And you, my brave comrades, who have chosen to abide by that flag 
which has graced the triumphs of by-gone days, may you never desert it 
in the hour of danger. Look up with hope, and as you gaze upon its 
bright star of lonelv grandeur, consider it the harbinger of success, — the 
genius of victory." 

The next morning, the three feint-hearted volunteers accordingly left 
camp, reducing our little number to twenty-one; — a lean force, tnily, for 
in expedition so hazardous. Yet none flinched at the thick array of antici- 
pated dangers. All were ready and anxious for the encounter. 

The above summary proceeding completely effected its designed oliject, 
at least for the present, and reduc^ the turbulent spirits to the wholesome 
restraints of discipline. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 



Mexican camp.— -PursulL — Advance upon Mora. — Enemy discovered.— Country be- 
tween the Rio de las Animas and Mora ; iu picturesque beauty. — Admirable pcHDt 
of observation. — Fortified position. — Battle of the pass ; order of attack, passage of 
the river, storming the enemy's camp, and number of killed, wounded and piuoih 
ere. — Council of war.— Prisonere released. — Message to Amijo. — Return march.— 
Mexican army. — Attacked, and results of action. — ^Mexican bravery. — Retreat— 
Cross the Table Mountain.— New species of wild onions. — March down the d* lai 
Animas.— Discouragements accumulate. — ^Disband. — Sketch cf factions.— Tasaa 
prisoners. — Arrival of reinforcements. — ^Battle of the Arroyo : killed, wounded, and 
prisoners.^— Retreat of Amijo. — " Stampede." — Frightful encounter with the COf 
tuanches and Kuyawas. — Discharge of troops. — ^Affidr with Capt. Cook.— 'fitenm^ 
dertoU. S. Dragoons, and fiuluie of expedition.— <Retum toTexa& — Journey 10 
the Platte. — Country between the Arkansas and Beaver creek.— Feasting at eaiD|k— 
Grows' eggs.— LateoeM of season. — Snow-storm in June. — ^An Indian fiirt— Seii^ 
comico adventure with a wolf. — ^Indians. — Song of the night-bird. ■ 

From Cdiche Camp we resumed our march, and, on the fourth daj t«^ 
sequent, struck the Taos trail at the crossing of the de las AnindU^ 
thence, continuing up the river about forty mifes, we came to a place x^ 
oently occupied by a detachment of IVlexicans. After a careful ezamioi^ 



FORTIFIED POSmON. 319 

tion, we became satisfied that it had been some sixty cavalry, who were 
then doubtless awaiting our advance at no great distance ; and, from ap- 
pearances, not more £an three days had elapsed since its evacuauon. 
Feeling ilI-dispo6ed to try the patience of our enemy by keeping him in too 
lo^ a suspense, we immediately started in pursuit. 

The route led by a rough pass over a spur of the Toas Mountains 
which heads the tiemis tempkidas southwest of the Cimarone, into a prairie 
rangi|g from east to west, forty-five or fifty miles long and thirty or more 
broad, and skirting the three principal streams that unite to form the Colo- 
Tado. From this point it continued over another spur of the mountain 
chain into a valley some ten miles broad, ranging from north to south 
and intersected by the trail from Taos to the Santa Fe road, striking the 
latter near tiie Waggon Mound,* — ^thence, for about twenty-five miles, 
across a spread of high prairie, Tquite rough and undulating, with frequent 
hills assuming a mountainous cnaracter,) to a considerable creek, four or 
five miles southeast of the town of Mora. 

At this point our scouts reported the enemy as occupying a fortified 
camp, which commanded the only feasible pass leading to the adjoining 
fletdements. Upon the reception of this intelligence we witiidrew to a de- 
serted ranche and encamped for the night, in order to obtain, if possible^ 
more certain information relative to his position and force. 

The country between the de las Animas and this place, as a general thing, 
gave indications of a good soil, but was quite arid, paniculany the prairie 
skirting the head branches of the Colorado. The hills and mountains 
were l^ss sterile than those farther east. They also afiforded an abundance 
of timber, consisting of pine, oak, cedar, and pinion. The creek bottoms 
embraced considerable quantities of excellent land, though but sparsely 
timbered. 

The mountains to the right towered majestically to an altitude of ten 
or twelve thousand feet, opposing their snowy crests in stern defiance to 
the heat of a summer's sun. 

Toward the close of our march, the landscape disclosed a scene of ro- 
mantic beauty and grandeur. Mingled among the pleasing diversity' of 
mountain, hill, dale, and lawn, vegas and UanoSy forests and prairies, here 
and there a small lake mirrored forth its bright waters, swarming with innu- 
merable water- fowl, decorated by broad flowery banks, and shut in by rug- 
ged highlands and rocky cliflfe, that seemed like some fairy's home, where 
tachantment held Nature's self in spell-bound admiration. The creeks and 
valleys of this section were also enclosed by abrupt banks, that sometimes 
pBotruded their precipitous walls to the very water's edge, and then again 
eamanded to give place to tlie grass, fruits, and flowers of mimic Edens. 

The prevaOing rock appear^ to be gray granite, ferruginous sandstone, 
tnd limestone. Game was ratlier scarce, and consisted principally of buf- 
falo, deer, and bear. 

Als a whole, this entire region may be considered as admirably adapted 

^ This mound is a singular natural elevation in the form of a covered wamn, 
the road from the United States to Santa Fe, — about fifty miles south ofTaot. 



930 BATTLE OF THE PASS. 

to grazing parposes, and, were it not for its aridity, might be cultivated to 
a conflideraole extent 

The men sent to reconnoitre returned aboat midnight, but had sncceeded 
in obtaining no satisfiictory information of the enenw'B position, owing to 
the darkness and their ignorance of the topography of the coantiy. How* 
ever, they reported having discovered a point overlooking his camp, from 
which our whole force might watch his movements, screened from his ob- 
•ervation by a dense thicket of pines, and recommended it for onr occupancy 
the ensuinff day. Accordingly, in the morning orders were given to that 
eflfect ; and, after a march of four or five miles, covered by an unbroken 
forest of pine and cedar, we arrived at the place designated, and encamped 
almoet within speaking distance of the enemy. 

No point could be more admirably situated for our purpose. The gradual 
acclivity by which we had advanced, studded with pine, hemlock, and |nii- 
ion, led to the summit of a high ridge, bounding a broad valley upon itB 
oraosite side with vast piles of perpendicular rock, several hundred feet in 
altitude. Through this valley a large creek traced its way, graced by oc- 
casional groves of cottonwood and willow. In one of these, appeared the 
Mexican encampment. 

So matchless was our position, by aid of a spy-^lass we could observe 
his every movement without incurring the risk of oeing ourselves discov- 
ored. 

A mere glance revealed the true state of afl&irs. The hostile force, con> 
eisting of some sixty strong, completely commanded the only entrance into 
the viuley from the east, and was otherwise so advantageously posted as to 
render an immediate attack extremely hazardous. We accordingly awaited 
the cover of night for further operations, and contented ourselves meanwhOe 
with watching this unsuspecting foe. 

Our plan was to storm the Mexican camp and force a passage into the 
adjoining town, where we expected to encounter another aetachment, and, 
after defeating it, make good our retreat before a sufficient reinforcement 
could be rallied to oppose us. 

Soon after sundown, arrangements bein^ completed, we commenced onr 
march. A detour of four or five miles led us to the head of a narrow and 
circuitous defile, marking the entrance to the valley ; winding our way 
through which silentiy, in a few moments we were in the immediate vicini^ 
of the enemy. 

Here dismounting, the company was drawn into line, and the plan of 
attack communicate to each, as follows : three men, mounted upon fleet 
horses, were to dispose of themselves, if possible, in such a manner as to 
prevent an escape, while the remainder, in two divisions, (the one headed 
oy the Col. commandant and the other by the first lieutenant,) commenced 
a sumultaneous attack at di^rent points. Orders were given to scale tbe 
enemy's breastwork, seize his arms, and demand his surrender, — ^but not 
to fire a shot, unless in case of resistance or an attempt to escape ; an^ 
even then, to avoid all unnecessary effusion of blood. 

Thus disposed, we advanced to the charge ; — but a new difficulty heie 
arose. The creek which, from our high point of observation during the 
day • had appeared only a diminutive stream, now presented its broaa BU^ 



AFFAIR OF THE OAP. ^1 

&ce, with a current of swift and deep water, while a steep bank upon tht 
other side showed the enemy at its very verge. Nothing daunted W9 
plunged in, and, almost as soon, gained the opposite shore. Ascending tho 
bank we attracted the notice of the sentinels, and received the challenge: 

^ Quienes veniren ?" — ^who comes ? 

" Que dijo ?" — ^what do you say ? 

" Quienes veniren, carraho 7" 

At this a rush was made upon the chaDengers, who were almost instantly 
disarmed, and our whole party, leaping into camp, gave to the enemy \he 
first intimation of its presence. 

''Munchos Tajanos ! "—exclaimed one, as the astonished MexicaiM 
snatched their arms. 

** Si, munchos Tajanos. — Quieron los scoupetas !" — ^was the reply, as 
we sprang to prevent them. 

Here a smart struggle ensued, which resulted in the defeat of the enemy 
with a loss of five killed, four wounded, and eighteen prisoners, — ^tbe re- 
mainder having escaped despite our eflbrts to prevent it, — but all the camp 
equipage fell into our hands, with seventy-two head of horses and muies* 
Among the arms taken were two or three pieces that had belonged to the 
Texan Santa Fe expedition of the fall of '41. 

A council was now held to decide upon the expediency of proceeding 
immediately to the neighboring town. A majority at first were favorable 
to the proposition ; — ^but some objected, and ur^ed the imprudence of weak- 
,ening our force by a division, as we should eiOier be necessitated to do, in 
that event, or relinquish the advantages already ^ined, — and, further, the 
enemy, being aware of our approach, was doubtless prepared to oppose a 
dangerous resistance, such as would be attended with great risk of life on 
our part, without securing any possible benefit ui its result. The latter 
reasons influenced the decision, and orders were accordingly given to with- 
draw from the scene of action. 

In the interim the wounded had been carefully attended to, and, as we 
were about to leave, the prisoners were all set at liberty, with these words s 
^ You are now free, ^ury your dead, and remember in future how vain 
it is to resist the arms of Texas. Tell Amijo, vour General, the Texana 
are men. and not wild beasts. They never kill an unresisting enemy y— 
tjiey never kill a prisoner of war. He has done both, — ^but let him beware 
how he does it again, for the lives of ten Mexicans shall be the forfeit for 
each oflence." . 

All things being arranged for a retrograde movement, we were promptly 
under way upon our retui*n march to the Cimarone. The route led witliin 
ten or twelve miles of tho Waggon Mound, at which pomt a large 
number of dark-lodiing objects appeared, but so indistinctly we were una- 
ble to determine their nature ; — ^these, as we subsequently learned, were a 
body of Mexican troops, numbering seven hundred and fifty men. 

Continuing our course, about noon we made camp at a gap in the moun- 
tain ridge, facing from the west the head branches of the Colorado. 

The sentinels were cautiously posted, two upon the summit in the rear, 
and two with the horses in fiont, and express orders given to them not to 
leave their stations until relieved, and to give immediate notice of the ap- 
pearance of any suspicious object. The remainder of the party were soon 



322 A RETREAT. 

bn^y occupied, some in prepantiona for dinner, and others in makiiig 
uneiuiB for a night of wakefulness. 

In far.t, each one conducted himself apparently with as little concern as 
though it were impossible that a Mexican could be found this side of the 
halls of Montezuma. Participating in this general feeling of security, 
and anxious to enjoy the relaxations of camp, in a brief intervel the sen* 
tinels deserted their posts and mingled among the loungers. 

This remissness was first noticM by a private, who hurriedly enquired, 
"Where is the guard ?'^ Scarcely were the words spoken, when anoUier 
exclaimed, ** There go our horses !" 

The latter announcement aroused all hands — ^but only in time ko witaesi 
our wnole cavallard under full headway before a small party of Mexican 
cavalry, while at the same instant a brisk fire was opened upon us from the 
rear, and the dusky forms of the enemy appeared both right and left ; thus 
we had the mortihcation to find our little band surrounded by a superkr 
force. 

Orders were given to dislodge the foe, and occupy his position in the 
rear. At the word *' charffe," our dauntless partizans, with a shout, rushed 
op the steep hill-side aiid drove .the jwinic-stricken Mexicans before them, 
TOO fled with the utmost precipitancy in all directions, throwing away their 
blankets, robes, arms, and even clothes, to aid them in their hurried escape. 
So great was tJieir consternation, in less than fifteen minutes not one re- 
mained in sight, either fieir or near. 

On examining the premises, we found fifteen or twenty saddles, with 
a mule, which they nad likewise abandoned,-^ut only two halfgaded 
animals told the remnants of the nobie cavallard of more than eighty head 
that had grazed around us scarcely thirty minutes before ; a tiling of itsdf 
equivalent of a defeat. 

What could twenty-one footmen do in an open prairie opposed by hun- 
dreds of cavalry, able at any time to choose their own place and mode of 
attack ? The issue was quite apparent, — we must retreat. In an advaQ^ 
togeous position, surrounaed by game, and acquainted with the topography' 
of the country, we might hold out against a force of thousands ; but it 
would be presumption to think of either maintaining our present ground 
or advancing upon the foe. 

Preparations were therefore immediately commenced for acting upon 
the only prudent alternative now left. Each man selected for himself a 
blanket, or robe, which, with such other necessaries as he could conveniently 
carry, was bound in the form of a knapsack and strapped to his shoulders; 
our animals were then heavily laden with provisions, and the remaining 
luggage (consisting of arms taken from the enemy, saddles, robes, blan- 
kets, knives, &,c.,) committed to the flames ; the value of property thus 
destroyed, amounted to several thousand dollars. It was a melancholy 
tiling to witness this wanton waste ; yet such is the custom of war under 
like circumstances. 

Toward sundown we took up our line of march, each one on foot with 
his shouldered pack, in every appearance illustrating the soldier's return 
••from the war !" 

In the above manner we trudged along, bearmg a course due east, till the 
•veoing of the tiiird day, which brought us to the base of the table mooo^ 



K <» • b 



w w V «* 

• • • « 






■<«■€. 



• • •> « 

C V 



V. >. C 



V 



e c . 



COMPANY DISBANDED. 320 

tain at the head of the Cimarone, — ^having discovered the enemy's scontf 
Iwvering in the distance on two or three occasions during the interval* 
The day following we crossed the mountain, upon whose summit was a 
beautiful plateau, some ten miles in width and of unknown length. 

The soil gave every evidence of fertility, and was well watered. I 
noticed a number of dtrawberry vines — the first I had seen in the country, 
IS well as a profuse array of floral loveliness. A considerable lake also 
appeared, whose banks were of perpendicular rock measuring a descent 
of fifteen or twenty feet; while on its shady side a pile of snow bade de- 
fiance to the heat of summer, and looked pleasingly strange amid the sur- 
rounding verdure. 

After a len^hy search, we finallv found a place of descent upon the 
opposite side oi the mountain, which led us into the valley of the extreme 
left hand fork of the Rio de las Animas. 

The bottom of this stream, as it emerged fix>m the moimtains, disclosed 
a soil of extluordinary fertility. Amon? its indigenous productions I 
noticed a spread of fifty acres or more, so aensely covered with onions that 
hundreds of bushels might be gathered in a short time. This playt was 
of a different kind from any I ever before saw. Its color was white, siie 
about equal to a pigeon's egg, and appearance much like that of the com- 
mon onion ; but it had flag-shaped stalks, and was much less o&nsive in 
taste and smell than is natural to this species of roots. 

Continuing down the valley of this creek, we struck the de las Animas 
cm the third day subsequent, and on the seventh, arrived at the egress of 
that stream from its frightful canon, nearly opposite Bent's Fort on the 
Arkansas. From this place an express was sent to the latter point to ob- 
tain, if possible, some information relative to the expected reinforcement 
from Texas, and, also, in regard to the movements of the enemy. 

The next day, however, 3ie messenger returned with a report so fiur 
from encouraging, that it served still more to depress our fast-sinking hopes. 
A general despondency seemed to weigh hke an incubus upon the mmda 
of both officers and men. Our inability to hold out under existing circum- 
stances was too apparent, as the sphere of operations embraced a circuit 
of five hundred miles or more, over deserts and mountains, that would 
waste us away with fatigue, watchings, hunger and thirst, by long and 
dreary marches to be performed on foot, through a country swarming with 
savage and half-civilized foes. A council was accordingly held, which re- 
sulted in the almost unanimous decision to disband. 

Discharges previously made out, bearing date May 24th, were now pre- 
sented to each one, absolving him from all further connection with the 
Texan army, and, on the morning of the 29th inst., our little band separa* 
ted in three parties ; one of these, consisting of four men, left for the can- 
on of the Cimarone ; another, headed by Col. Warfield, started for Texas ; 
anu the remainder commenced their return journey toward the Platte 
river. 

The story of the former of these fractions, so far as relates to the diffi- 
culties between Mexico and Texas, is briefly told. Our adventurers bear- 
ing for the Cimarone reached their hoped-for Elysium ; but, soon aftei* 
having fallen into an ambuscade of one hundred add thiity Mexican troopii 

28 



926 HARD FIGHTING AND B£YEfiSE& 

■ 

were taken prisoners, and, in a few days subsequent, found themselvee in 
irons and snugly stowed away jn tiie calaboose at Santa Fe ; while there, 
one of them med from bad treatment, and the otiiers would have been siiot 
Jiad not the dread of Texan vengeance prevented the deed. Succeeding 
events, however, effected ;their liberation. 

The party accompanying Col. W. fell in with the expected reinforcements 
from Texas, near tlie Crossing of the Arkansas, and again submitted itself 
to the fortune of war This force consisted of one hundred and eighty vol- 
vmeers, under the command of Col. Snively, an old veteran of the T4 
levolution. 

Soon after, a detachment of forty Tezans, headed by Col. Warfield, 
eonntered t^ie advance ^uard of the enemy, numbering one hundred picked 
men* The approach ot the latter had tieen observed from an eminence^ 
when the Texans were drawn up under cover of a small sand-bank, near a 
cieek, (arroyo,) awaiting to intercept him. Ignorant of the presence of 
danger, the Mexicans were pressing on at a rapid rate, till brought to a 
•udden halt by an opposing force within half rifle-shot. 

^ Quienes V* demanded the Texan officer. 

* Mexicanas. Quienes sons uste ?" replied the commandante. 

" Tajanos," returned the Texan, through his interpreter. " We have 
come to fight, and shall light unless you surrender. But, that you may 
know with whom you have to deal, we give you thirty minutes to decidie 
whether to fight or surrender. If you choose the former, a signal from 
your iword will announce the answer.*' 

A brief discussion ensued among them upon this sumn^ns. The Mexi- 
cane were disposed to surrender, but the Pueblo Indiahs, of whom fifty 
or more were included in the party, scornfully refused to accede to anj 
each proposition, declaring that they had come tojighi, and not to surrender 
fike women upon the hrsi appearance of an inferior enemy. At length, 
a chief ended the dispute by aavancing to the front line and giving the pre- 
scribed signal. 

The onset of the Texans was terrific beyond description. The enemy's 
line was instantly broktai, and the cry of ^ misericordia !" (mercy) sounded 
upon all sides. The conflict lasted scarcely five minutes; but, though 
anort, it was decisive and bloody. 

Tweniy-two of the enejiiy were killed, thirty wounded, and the remain- 
der taken prisoners, v\iuh the exception of one who succeeded in affect- 
ing his escape. Moi a Texan was hurt. 

Gfeneral Amijo, wha at this time lay encamped at the Cimarone, forty 
or fifty miles disiant, with an army of seven hundred Mexicans, on 
receiving intelligence of the defeat of the flower of his invinciblei, 
like other examples equally illustrious, felt his courage '*ooze out at 
hie fingers' ends," and, nut being disposed to encounter such dangerous 
enemies, ordered an immediate retreat and fell back on Santa Fe. 

Col. Snively was on the point of marching in pursuit, when an incident 
occurred which altered the whole aspect of aflTairs, and finally frustrated 
all the purposes of the expedition. This was effected by a war-party of 
eighty Kuyawa and Cumanche Indiana, who succeeded in stampedit^t 
Jaige band of the army horses. 



ABXY SURRENDEBED TO U. S. DRAGOONS. 327 

They were followed by eleven men under the commaod of CoL War- 
field, and, after a running fight of two or three miles, an action was 
brought about. As they halted, Qol. W. ordered his men to dismount 
and form a breastwork with their horses, which was promptly done ;— 
ra^nwhile the Indians, numbering sixty or more, had closed around, 
with whoops and yells, and other demonstrations of their expected 
trtnmpb. 

A dischnrge from the Texans brought four of their warriors to the 
ground, and wounded six more. This broadside was returned through a 
shower of arrows^ and repeated by the intrepid eleven in a pistol-round, 
when three more of the assailants fell, and twice that number felt the 
effects of an unerring aim. Hereupon the Indians hastily retreated with 
their wounded, leaving seven of their number to grace the scene of ac- 
tion. Not one of the Texans was injured, and only one of their horses 
killed and three wounded. Further pursuit, however, was abandoned, 
and the captive horses were left to honor the service of their new masters. 

A loss so inopportune caused the postponement of further operations 
for the present, and, in connection with other difficulties, created so much 
discontent in the minds of some, that one entire company declared its in- 
tention of returning to Texas, and requested its immediate discharge. An 
emergency of this kind, not having been provided for in the terms of en- 
listment, left the commanding officer no other alternative than to accede 
to a measure he had no power to prevent, and the demands of the <lisal> 
fected were accordingly complied with. 

The army was thus reduced to eighty effective men, which made it 
necessary to release the prisoners as yet retained in custody. These 
during their detention had been treated with great kindness, and their 
wounded carefully attended to by the company's surgeon ; on their re- 
lease twelve horses were allowed for their conveyance, while the other 
prisoners were furnished with four rifles and a quantity of ammunition, two 
running horses, and enough provisions to serve for several days. Thus 
provided, they were set at liberty with the pithy message : ''Bid your 
countrymen learn, from this example, how to treat prisoners of war !'* 

Soon after tl^e events above related, the arniy took up a position on the 
Arkansas river, a few miles below the Santa Fe road, for the purpose of 
procuring a supply of provisions from the vast quantities of buffalo affi)rd- 
ed by that vicinity. While encamped here, hunting parties were al- 
lowed to cross into the United States territory in quest of game, — not in 
a national capacity, but as mere private individuals. 

On one of these occasions the hunters were discovered and pursued by 
two companies of United States DraiQfoons, under Capt. Cook, on their 
way to escort the Santa Fe traders as far as the Crossing of the Arkansas. 

The chase was continued to the river bank opposite the Texan camp, 
when a conference was requested, and the commanding officers of bom 
mnies met, as was supposed, for an interchange of mutual civilities ; but 
such proved not to be the case. 

Captain Cook, on the part of the Americans, contended that the 
Texans had invaded the United States territory, and that they even now 
occupied a position within its limits ; — ^his duty was plain. He must de> 



S28 COUMTRT FROM THE ARKANSAS TO BEAVER. 

nand, and, if necasMnr, eokirce their immediate snmnder. Thiily mi- 
nutes only would be allowed for a dedaioa. 

Cola. Snively and Waifield urged many arguroenta to prove the injustiee 
of hie demand and the fiillacy of the premiaea upcm which it was based, but 
all to no purpose. The Captain waa infleadble. 

Meanwhile, the American troopa had craased the river, and were drawn 
up in front of the Tezans ready for action. It was vain for a foice of 
eighty men to attempt holding out against one hundred and siz^ Umtei 
States Dragoons, backed by two fielo-pieces. Retreat, too, was impracti- 
cable, and they accordingly surrendered their arms, upon Texan territory, 
in compliance with the unjust demands of the American commander. • 

Forty of the priaoners were escorted to Fdft Leavenworth, and the re- 
mainder set at lioerty, and left with only twelve liflea to fight their way back 
to Texas, through the heart of the Cumanche country. They had, how- 
ever, previously managed to secrete a quantity of arms and ammunitioD, 
and, in a few minutes subsequent to their release, were fully equipped and 
ready to meet a Mexicai force of eight times their number. 

Col. Warfield was elected comniander of the newly organized compaiqr» 
who immediately set out in quest of the enemy. 

But here a new obetiicle presented itself ^—tne whole country was swarm- 
ing with Cumanche and Kuyawa Indians ; so much so that a further pro- 
secution of the campaign must inevitably prove most disasCrous. This 
circumstance led to the abandonment of the purposes of the expedition, and 
the scanty remnants of the army engaged in it took up their line of march 
for Texas, where they arrived during the month of Jaly following, wasted 
by toQ and su&rfcig, as well as by repeated conflicts with a relentless 
savage foe. 

Thus ended the second attempt to subjugate the province of Banta Fe to 
the government of the new-born Republic of Texas. 

A few days preceding this grand finale^ a small party, including myself, 
commenced its journey to the moux^tains adjoining the head waters of the 
Platte river. We were all on foot, and sufEered greatly from fatigue and 
thirst during our dreary march over the plains of burning sand and withered 
stubble that impeded our progress for some distance. 

Crossing the Aitoisas at a point several miles below Bent's Fort, we 
proceeded up one of the numerous dry creeks finding their dischaige into 
that stream from the north, and, oa the fifth day subsequent, arrived at a 
grove of Cottonwood, upon a watercourse near the eastern extremitvof 
Uie ** Divide," and in the immediate vicinity of several tributaries of both 
the Platte and Kansas rivers. Here the abundance of bufl^o induced foir 
of us to remain for a short time, while the others continued their couree. 

The intermediate country from the Arkansas to this place, presents an 
uninviting aspect, and, though not naturally sterile, is rendered repulsive 
6x>m its extreme aridity. The creeks are most of them mere beds of sand, 
entirely destitute of water, except at brief intervals when their percolated 
currents are shown in brackish pools, soon again to inhume themselves is 
the willm^ earth. 

There la rarely a tree in &e whole distance, which circumstance adds 



GOMICiX ADVENTURE. ^29 

mnch to the cheerieBsncss of its solitode. A general scarcity of rock aho 
prevails, and the only specimens I noticed were exhibited in the buiks of 
watercourses, and consisted of slate and fossiliferous limestone (formed of 
an extinct species of shell-fish, principally bivalves*) The soil in many 

E laces might be called fertile, and, were it not for lack of moistare, conid 
e tamed to good account for agricultaral purposes. 
The landscape is eenerally undulating, clisclosing at the north and north- 
east broken ridges of hills, which were now and then surmounted by scat- 
tering pines. 

The buf&lo having left the vicinitjr soon after our arrival, we again 
moved camp eight or ten miles, to Beaver creek, an affluent of the 
Phitte, where we renuuned for fifteen or twenty days. 

Our stay at this place was one continued series of feasting, as we lacked 
nothing of all the varied delicacies procurable in a countrv abounding with 
game. But one item in our entertainment was indeed a novelty ^ — ^vis . 
crows' eggs. Almost every tree and bush, skirting the creek at intervals 
for miles above and below, had been appropriated to the use of the countless 
swarms of crows that populated the surrounding prairie. Sometimes four 
or five neste ot these birds might be seen upon a single tree. On two or 
three occasions I obtained from six to ten dozen of eggs in the course of 
an hour. These, whether boiled^ roasted, or fried, were found quite an ac- 
cepibible addition to our bill of daily fare. 

The climate of this region is evidently less mild, and its warm season 
much shorter, than is common to other places in the same latitude. 

It was now the middle of June, and yet the wild fruite, currants, cherries, 
and plums, were only in blossom, and all other kinds of vegetation assumed 
the appearance of recent spring. Indeed, the day succoring our arrival, 
snow fell to a depth of three or four inches, and remained upon the ground 
for several hours. Whether such occurrences are common, I have not the 
necessary information to decide. 

In our excursions after game, the remains of an Indian fort had been 
discovered in a small grove, a short distance below camp, which received 
the honor of our subsequent occupancy. A few hours devoted to repairs 
rendered it a complete shelter from either wind or rain ; and, still farther 
to enhance its conveniences, we succeeded in digging a small well adjoin- 
ing the entrance, thus securing a most welcome supply of cool water. 
Here revelling in the midst of plenty, with nothing to think of or care for 
but our own personal comforts, we had no mind to exchange our situation 
for the fatigues of war and the drudgery of camp-duty. 

Several incidents also occurred in the interim to enliven the scene and 
relieve its otherwise dull monotony. On one occasion a strolling wolf, 
venturing too near camp, received the contente of my rifle and instantly 
fell. Supposing the shot to be a fatal one, I advanced and seized him ,by 
the tail with the design of taking his skin. 

But the creature, having been only stunned by a neck wound, now re- 
vived in full strength, and, enraged at his rough treatment, called into ex- 
ercise the utmost tension of his energies to a^rd a bitter sample of the 
fierccnosn of wolfine vengeance. Here was a quandary — ^to relinquiali 

2S* 



380 THE NOCTURNAL WARBLER. 

Ihe hold would have been to invite a doubtful collision — ^to allow him an 
siwtant's time for turning upon me, must have proved equally perilous ; — 
the only resource was to retain my grasp with twofold energy, and run 
backwards as fast as possible, which I did, pulling the struggling beast 
after me, — ^now twisting this way, now that way, in vain effort to attack, 
^«nd growling and snapping fails teeth with uJ the ferocity of his sav- 
age nature. 

What would have been the result of this strange adventure, it is hard to 
tell, were it not that one of my camp-mates hastened to the rescue, and 
with a club despatched his wolfship At any rate I had no curiosity to 
tfubmit the question to a further test. 

With us the practice of early rising was remembered only as the whim 
of visionary theorists, and this important item in the routine of daily du- 
ties, was often postponed to an unreasonable hour. Once we came very 
near paying dearly for the indulgence. The sun had told more than two 
hours of his daily round, and only one of our number had defied the drow- 
siness of sleep and betaken himself to an eminence to scan the surround- 
ing solitude. Here the first object that met his gaze was a war-party of 
mounted savages, advancing upon him at full charge. 

He had scarcely time to reach camp and give the alarm, when the whole 
troop came pouring in upon all sides with the rapidity of a torrent, making 
the air resound with their terrific yells. Seizing my arms I was the first 
to meet the assailants, and, levelling at them, made signs that an advance 
would be at their peril. Upon this they recoiled, and shouted at the top 
of their voices, *^ Amigas ! Arapdhos /" accompanied with the signs of 
friendship and their nation. 

Satisfied of the truth of these declarations, we permitted them to come 
npy and, in a few minutes^ all were quietly seated, and the *^ pipe" per* 
forming its tireless rounds. 

O^r boldness in daring to oiler a resistance greatly excited their sur- 
prise, and the more so, as we had only four rifles, while thev had many 
arrows, and ^ere more than ten times our number. An old chief^ after 
listening to their remarks, replied : 

** My people must not deceive themselves. The pale faces are brave 
and kill their enemies a long way off. Those " said he, pointing \q a 
brace of pistols, *' would have laid many of my warriors low, after the 
medicine4rons had spoken their death-words. The Great Spirit has taught 
the pale-face how to fight." 

Our visitors had at first supposed us a war-party of Pawnees, and came 
with the full design of securing a scalp-dance. Had they caught us nap- 
ping, without doubt our own lives would have been substituted for those 
of^eir enemies. 

In a few hours the motley crew again resumed their course, and left us 
to the undisturbed enjoyment of our sequestered retrefit, thankful indeed 
to be free from their presence. 

In addition to the howling of wild beasts and the hooting of prairie-owlfl 
ky night, the locality aflorded other music to sooth the hours of slumber. 
A biia of unknown species had built her nest in the boughs of a cotton- 



LOST. 331 

wood that expanded directly over our heads, and devoted her maternal care 
to the sustenance of her fledgelings. But her unwearied industry by day 
less commanded our admiration uian the sweet melody of her nocturnal 
warblings. 

Soon as the ** pointers " told the ** noon of night,'* her song commenced 
in all its variations, like the soft breathings of an angel's lute, nor ceased 
till the gray of morning broke from the empurpled east. Often have I 
listened half dreaming:ly to the bewitching notes that mingled with the 
harsh discord of the wilderness around me, and fancied myself guarded by 
celestial spirits against the assaults of harm. 

With such kindly thoughts, who might not mount in his slumbers on. 
the wings of imagination, and step fiom 8tai,a8 'mid the changeless reahn» 
of bliss. / 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

Loit — ^Night on the Prairie. — ^Head of the Kaima river. — ^Minerala.— Country^-* 
Gold. — ^Wonderful incident relative toa wounded bull. — ^Indians.— Join the Arapa- 
hoe. — ^Moving village. — Country between Beaver cteek and the Platte.--Canoxu— • 
Reach Fort Lancaster. — ^Fortune bettered.— -NewB from the States. — ^Murder. — ^Ex- 
traordinary instances of human tenacity to life. — ^Arrival of Indiana.— Theft— 
Chyenne outrage.— Return of Oregon eougraiila.— *' OM Bdb," and his adventoies.— 

A ** Protracted Meetmg," or Indian Medidne-making. — ^Indian oath Jaunt to th» 

mountains.^ — Mountain scenery.— Camp on Thompson'a creek. — Wild fruits. — Con- 
centration of valleys.'^Romantic view. — ^A gem in the mountains. — Grand river 
pess. — Salt lakes. — ^Astonishing scope of vision. — ^The black-tailed deer. — Peculi- 
arity in horses. — Renuirkable natural fortification. — Return.— Travelling by guess. 

OiTE day, on leaving camp in quest of game, I carelessly travelled till 
near sundown, without success. The hills, hollows, and ravines which, 
intersected my way and contiouaUy changed its bearings, so completely 
bewildered me, that, as night shut down upon the cheerless expanse, I 
found myself far away from any suitable camping-place, and alone amid 
the realms of loneliness. Thus conditioned, 1 was forced to submit to 
circumstances, and accordingly accepted of such lodgings as nature af- 
forded. 

My lonely and dangerous situation, with the thrilling sensations expe- 
rienced daring the interval, gave birth to the following lines, which, by aid 
of a rude pencil formed from a bullet, were next meaning traced upon a 
small scrap of paper. I submit them to the reader, not that they possets 
any intrinsic merit, but because they will enable him to derive some ^"*^ 
idea of the terrific wildness and beauty of the surrounding scenes. 



^92 MIGHT ON THE PRAHUE. 

NIGHT ON THE PRAIRIE. 

I. 

The sable earb of darkness clothes the land, 
And twiught's sickly hne bids day farewell ; 

The prairie's vast expanse on either hand 
Marks sotitude's domain. O'er hill and deU, 

And wide-extended plain, I cast my eyes, 
To view, perchance, some ffrove or fav'ring stream. 
And hie me thitherward while yet the gleam 

Of day's fast-failing light bepaints the skies 
With tints scarce seen, — lor there Vd seek repose^— 

But for them look in vain ; so here, alone, 
Wearied and worn, I sit me down and close 

Mytiresome wanderings, — nor bate to own 
The chilling thrill of terror o'er me creeps, 
And from my mind ail thoaghts of slumber keeps ! 

n. 

Oh, Solitnde ! First-bora of Night ! Tis here 
Thy reign is undisputed ! Here no noise 

Of human feet doth greet thy list'ning ear, — 
Save chance as mine, or savage want enjojrs 

His arms at chase or rage at bloody war ! — 
Here haunts the beast of prey. The starved wolfs hold 
In ceaseless concert swells ! The midnight owl 

Joins in his dolesome lay ; — the raven's caw 
Loud mingles with the panther's yell, — and then 

The hoarse-toned bison grunts his bass, and makes 
Thy dismal realm more drear to lonely men. 

iEolus here his/freshrfonn'd wind awakes, 
And marks its speed unchecked ; whose whistling mota 
O'er tiby domain makes loneliness more lone ! 

in. 

My thoughts, now kindred to the scene, arise 
In hurried flight, whose hideous aspects wake. 

Full quick, imagination's sleepless eyes, 
That conjure up such frightful forms as shake 

The boldest hearts with dread. In everv herb 

Of prouder growth, — ^whose prongs the sweeping Uait 
Hatn taught to move« — some foe of savage cast 

Appears ana threatens ill, as if to curb 
The onward progress of the god of sleep :— 

(For here man sees his fellow man, unknown. 
As foe; and, arm'd for fight, he minds to keep 

The strictest watch, lest, from advantage shown, 
He tempt unlucky war.) So hurriedly 
I snatch my arms to fight each form I see ! 



mOHT ON THE PRAIRIE. 338 

IV. 

Bat, why thus fear ? Give place, ye viskiOB dread ! 

Ye thoughts of boding danger, drearisome, 
Cease to oppress ! Is not the path I tread 

So by Omniscience mark'd, that perils come 
Not near, to even hurt a single hair, 

Without His wise permit ? Are not my days 

Securely meted out, and all mv ways 
So guarded, too, that thronging dangers share 

No part in harm's advance or death's progress 
Tin all are told 7 And can my vigilance, 

Fathei^d by childish fear, make hkh^ or less 
The given sum ? Cheerly, draw courage thence. 

My cowering heart ; feel safety here. Give room 

To other thoughts, and chase these douds of gloom ! 

V. 

Thus, banished fear, at reason's bid, I cast 

My willing gaze toward heaven. In every star 
That forms tue sparkling crown of night, though &8t 

In regions of unbounded space, so uur 
As scarcely seen by mortal ken^ — appears 

Some guardian angel, robed in lisnt, to keep 

His ceaseless vigils o'er my couch of sleep, 
Lest in my slumbering moments danger near 

To cut the thread c? life, and thus undo 
The purposes of God. The silver moon 

Sheds forth her radiance unconfine^J, and through 
The desert wild to flower and herb gives boon, 

And decks each blade with dewy pearls, and povn 

Them on the earth, to cheer my waking hours. 

VI. 

Nature's vast caravansera, above. 

Below, around, on either side, begirt 
With midnight's varied splendors, scenes I love^ 

Becomes enchantment's self, while zephyrs sport 
The fragrance of the wild-flowers multiform, 

And greet my nostrils with their rich perfume. 

To pfease my senses. Thus my thoughts resmne 
Their wonted course, and hush the passing storm 

Of fear. Alone ! Not lonely I. For here 
E'en loneliness companion proves to me, 

And solitude is company. My ear 
Drinks music from these savage sounds ; I see 

Amusements in these forms ; my heart's as strong. 

And easy beats, as 'mid a city'd tlirong ! 



884 THE GOLD REGION. 



VIL 

To me thrice welcome then, je prairies wild ! 

Midni^^t, and gloom, and solitade, ye please 
My restless fancy ! Welcome then your child ! — 

For here's my home. And so, with mind at ease, 
I will embrace my mother earth, and court 

The soothing power of sleep. The clear blue sky 

My canopy, tlie 'ground my bed, I lie 
Encurtain'a by the pale moon-beams, which spoit 

Beside my lowly couch, and liffht the dew 
With mimic diamonds' glow — while flowers around 

My pillow'd head their willing incense strew, 
And the sweet dreaming bird anon doth sound 

Some isolated note of melody ! — 

Thus chamber'd here, may not kings envy me ? 

My return to camp the next day served to quiet the apprehensions that 
had oeen experienced on my account during the interim. 

This excursion took me some fifteen miles eastward, to the head waters 
of the Kansas river* The country in that neighborhood wore a barren 
aspect, and was generally sandy and undulating. 

I noticed a kind of mineral substance, of a jetty lustrous appearance, 
which I took to be black-lead. I also remarked certain indications of gold, 
but whether this metal actually exists here I am unable to say ; yet true it 
is, the surface aflbrds large quantities of ^ gold blossom," and it is said 
also, that gold has been found in these parts. 

The region lying upon the head branches of the Kansas river is con- 
sidered very dangerous, — it being the war-ground of the Pawnees, Caws, 
Ch^ennes, Sioux, and Arapahoe, — and hence comparatively little is faiown 
of Its character and resources. It is represented as quite sandy and 
sterile back from the watercourses, and in many other places but little 
better than a desert waste. The gold story alluded to m the preceding 
paragraph came to me from various sources, in the following shape : 

Some twenty years since, while the Arapahos were at hostilities with 
the whites, a war-party of that tribe advanced against the Pawnees, led on 
by a noted chief, called ** Whirlwind." Three only of them had guns, and 
they soon expended their stock of bullets in shooting small game, there be- 
ing no buffiilo upon the route. Finally, left without any thing to eat, tbef 
became discouraged, and a council was held to discuss the expediency of 
relinquishing the expedition. 

Having seated themselves upon a small eminence, the question of return 
was debated with great earnestness, — a majority behig in the affirmative* 
But the head chim, ^ Whirlwind," bringing all his eloquence to bear upon 
the opposite side, at last obtained their consent to proceed. 

During the conference, several small pieces of a glittering yellow sub* 
stance were discovered upon the surface, which proved soft and eusij 
worked into anv shape. From these a supply of bullets was procorei 
and, resuming their course, they soon after met the Pawnees, with whom 






..-^ 



JOCf ARAPAHOa 937 

ikBf fofo^it, and were Tictorious^ — every ballet discharged killing a& 
eoeiny* 

This victory was so signal and complete, that the superstitions warriora 
attributed it solely to the medicmd-doings of the yellow balls^ — three or four 
of which were finally buried with the chief at his death. The only white 
man permitted to see them, describes them as having been precisely the 
color of brass, — very soft and heavy. Admitting that the story is true, * 
there are doubtless very rich mines of gold in this vicinity, that being the 
only metal assimilating brass in color. 

Previous to our leaving Beaver creek, an incident occuned showing the 
remarkable tenacity of life peculiar to buffida 

An old bull appeared in the'distance, travelling at a rapid rate almost 
Erectly towards camp. Being in want of a re^upply of fresh meat, I 
Seized mv rifle and advanced to intercept him. Owing to the unfavorable 
state of the wind, I was forced to make so lone* a shot that the ball fell some 
two feet below the mark, and struck near the knee-joint of the fore leg, 
abiverinff it to pieces. 

Still, however, the animal kept on, with scarcely diminished speed, and 
held me a chase of three miles or more before I could overtake him to fin- 
ish the work. At length he was dispatched ; but, on butchering him, I 
Uns surprised to find a third bullet-wound, apparently three or four days 
oM. The ball was full one-half the size of my own, and, incredible as it 
may seem, had penetrated the butt of the buffMs heart. 

I could scarcely believe my own eyes, — ^yet such was the fiict. The 
creature had survived a heart-shot for days, and then, with a broken leg, 
had held me a chase of three miles. 

Our final adventure at this camp, was with a party of Indians. Having 
dBscovered the latter, early one morning, and supposing them Pawnees, 
we prepared for an encounter. The objects of our apprehension, mista- 
king us for the same, continued manoeuvring upon the adjoining hills the 
entire day, in such a manner as to lead us to conclude the whole 
country was filled with Indians. ^ 

Toward sundown, after vainly endeavoring to procure an attendant, I 
armed myself and proceeded alone to the spot where they had been last 
seen, determined to discover, if possible, the nature and extent of the 
danger that awaited us. Here, a single warrior advanced to meet me,-^ 
giving signs of friendship and of his nation. In answer to the inquiry, 
why his party had acted so strangely, he said they had thought us enemies, 
and were afraid. 

He accompanied me to camp, and, soon after his companions came up ; 
but, instead of the powerful war-party of Pawnees awaiting to siaugnter 
us by niffht, as our imaginations had depicted, and their cunning move- 
meiitB lea us to infer, they proved but three Arapaho warriors, three squaws, 

* The ooontiy adjacent to the head bmnchee of the Kaiuas river is but little 
known to the whites, who seldom visit it on account of its dangerous nature. That 
^itokbie mineials are contained in its soil is quite probable, and no doubt fhey will 
be tarooght to light upon due research. 

29 



S36 JPBEVAIUNG BOCK. 



mt»m0»»t»*tt»*>t»0»^ m0*0*0t0>^^^^i' 



and two ehiidran. Our muprise at this laugbaUe dmouememl was oolf 
eqnmlled by thnr own. 

Thejr annomioed themselves in search oi the Aiapaho viUage, and ez- 

pressed mach {deasore at meedng with the whites. Our visitors havuig 

passed the night with ns, the next morning we yielded to their solicitatiQiiSi 

and set cot with them to the village, some eighteen miles distsnt, in & 

y northwest diiectioo. 

About noon we anrived at the place, and found six or seven hmidied 
lodges of Arapahos, Chyennes, and Sioux, encamped in a large vallsy 
akirting a small affluent of Beaver creek. 

The village, being prepared to move, in a few moments succeeding our 
arrival, was en route for the Platte river. The spectacle was novel and 
imposing. Lodge followed lodge in successive order, — Ibrming vast pn^ 
cessi<Mis for miles in length. Squaws, children, horses, and dogs, mingling 
in promiscuous throng, covered the landscape in every direction, and gave 
it tne aspect of one dense mass of life and animation. 

Here a troop of gorgeously dressed and gaily painted damsels, all ra» 
diant with smiles and flaunting in conscious beauty, bestriding richly ca« 
parisooed horses, excited the admiration and commanded the homage of 
gallantry ; there a cavalcade of young warriors, bedaubed with feuitastie 
colors — black, red, white, blue, or yellow, in strict accordance with savage 
taste — ^habited in tbeir nicest attire, swept proudly along, chanting their 
war-deeds in measured accents to the deep-toned drum ; and then another 
band of pompous horsemen scoured the spreading plain, in eager race to 
test the speed of their foaming chargers ; and, yet again, a vast army of 
mounted squaws, armed with the implements for root-digging, spread fiur 
and wide in search of the varied products of the prairie ; then, among the 
moving mass, passed slowly along the travees, conveying the aged, ii^rm, 
and helpless, screened from the heat of a summer's sun by awnings c^ skins, 
that beshaded their cradled occupants, — while immense trains of pack-ani* 
mals, heavily laden with provisions and camp equipage, as they crowded 
amid the jogging multitudes, united to complete the picture of a travelling 
Indian viUage. 

Yielding to the request of our new friends, we proceeded with them ten 
or twelve miles further and passed the night in their lodge. 

Our route from Beaver creek led over a tumulous country, interspersed 
with valleys of a rich soil, and prolific in rank vegetation. The side-hilli 
aflbrded large quantities of pomme blanc, and the prairies and bottoms a 
splendid array of choice floral beauties. 

The creeks disclosed wide, sandy beds, often dry and skirted by broad 
valleys which were passably well timbered. The principal ridges were 
not high, but surmounted by dense pine forests, with pleasant openings, 
smiling in all the loveliness of spring. 

Notwithstanding the scanty volumes of the streams, the country presenti 
t^ the traveller tlie appearance of being well watered by frequent rains, 
while ever and anon a gurgling fountain strikes upon his ear with its soft 
music. 

Stratified rock is usually rare ; the only species noticed were limestone 
and sandstone. I remarked a great abundance of silex and iiombleiMl 



HUMAN TENACITY TO LIFE. 339 

^tfa some cttrioiiB specimens of ligneous petrifiactions. The only indica- 
tion of minerals observable, was that of iron and coal. 
- The entire section fiom Beaver to Cherry creek possesses nearly the 
ttme geological and minemlological character. Its indigenous produc- 
tions are such as are common to the mountain prairies, and are found in 
equal abundance ; — a remark which will also apply to its game. 

As a whole, perhaps two-thirds of it might be cultivated, to some extent, 
were it not for unseasonable frosts ; and all of it might be turned to good 
acconnt for stock-raising. 

The next day we bade farewell to our Indian friends, (leaving behind us 
one of our number, who chose to accompany them to the Fort, J and again 
launched forth upon the broad expanse. Bearing a cpurse west-northwest, 
about noon of the second day we struck Cherry creek, some thirty-five or 
forty miles above its mouth ; — ^thence, crossing the lofty plateaux, on the 
west, with two or three intervening creeks, toward evening of the third 
day we reached the Platte river at its exit from the mountains. 

Our intention was to enter the mountains and spend a few weeks in 
deer-hunting ; but, the river proving impassable, on account of high water, 
we were compelled to forego that purpose for the present, and accordingly 
started for Fort Lancaster to procure a re- supply of ammunition. 

Continuing down the Platte, on the third day we reached our destination, 
and were kindly received, though humorously rallied upon our way-worn 
and forlorn appearance. Nor were we backward to join the laugh, occa- 
sionally retorting, when the jocose current set too strong against us, 
" Well, what do you know about toarl — You've never been to Texas !" 

The 6th of July dated our arrival, — ^the glorious fourth having been spent 
in plodding over a broad prairie, on foot, with rifles upon our shoulders and 
packs Upon our backs. By comparison, I concluded my fortune had slight- 
ly improved since July 4th of the preceding year, which found me in a 
cheerless prairie, on foot, packing my bed, sumost naked, without knife or 
gun, or having had a mouthful! to eat for two days previous. 

Capt. Fremont, elsewhere spoken of, had just arrived from the States on an 
expedition to Oregon, ordered by the United States Government, and brouii;ht 
intelligence of an existing armistice between Mexico and Texas. Accom- 
'panying his party ^as one whom I tecoffnized as an old acquaintance 
of (^er lands, the first and only one I had the pleasure of meeting with 
during my long sojourn in the country. 

Jtdy 11/^, witnessed the death of an old mountaineer at Fort Lancas- 
ter, who came to liis end from the effects of a pistol wound received in a 
drunken firolic on the 4^. The ball entered the back about two inches 
below the heart, severely fracturing the vertebrae and nearly severing the 
spinal marrow. 

He lived just one week succeeding the occurrence, but meanwhile suf- 
fered more than the agonies of death. His body below the wound was en- 
tirely devoid of feeling or use from the first, and, as death preyed upon him 
by piecemeal, he would often implore us with most piteous and heart-melt- 
ing appeals kindly to ease his miseries by hastening his end. The mur^ 
diem* was left at large, and in two or three weeks subsequent accompanied 
Capt Fremont to Oregon* 



840 "OtDBOa*" 

The above is the most remarkable exhibition of human tenacity to lift 
that ever came nnder my personal observation ; I have, however, heail 
of instances &r more extnuminaiy. The case of Ex-Governor Boggs, of 
Mo., in '41, who recovered from the eflects of a wound, that not on^ frac- 
tured his scull, but actually emitted particles of the brain, is doubtless wcJl 
koown ; yet another of like nature, still more wonderful in its details, oc> 
curred to an old French trapper, named Augustine Clermont, with whom 
I am well acquainted. 

Clermont, in an affray with a Spaniard, had been prostrated by a blow 
that fractured his scull in the occiput His antagonist then fell upon him 
•jod thrust the point of a knife into the brain repeiUedly, and finally left faim 
for dead. 

Soon after, he vras found by his friends in this deplorable situation, wbO| 
on perceiving he yet breathed, kindly dressed his wounds, and bestowed 
upon him the attention his situation demanded, and in a short time he be» 
eame perfectly sound and hearty. 

Jidy \ZiSu The Indian village before spoken of, on its way in quest of 
buf&lo, visited the Fort, and, as is customary on such occasicms, the 
squaws and children made themselves busy in appropriating to their own use 
such little articles as came within their reach. I was minus a blanket 
through their artfulness, and several other individuals suflered equally widi 
myself. 

Some six weeks afterward they returned, and again called at the Fort, 
when, recognizing my stolen blanket in the possession of a young warrior, 
I immediately took it from him. At first he stoutly resisted, and the more 
BO as several hundred of his tribe were present,— -but, all to no purpose; 
and he at length yielded, as he saw me on the point of enforcing my claims 
to it in a more feeling way, such as would doubtless have endangered his 
own personal safety. 

I remained at Fort Lancaster for two months or more ; and the several 
incidents which occurred in the interim may be thus briefly summed up : 

The first in order was an outrage of the Chyennes, in cruelly murdering 
the young man with whom I had passed a portion of the preceding winter 
upon Vasques' creek. 

The next was the appearance of a small party of emigrants, on their re- 
turn to the States, — shaving become displeased with the management of 
the company then en route for Oregon. 

A third was the arrival of one of the four men who had left for the Clwr 
arone at the fij-st disbanding of the Texan volunteers, and were subsequent 
ly taken prisoners by the Mexicans. 

After being incarcerated at Santa Fe for two or three weeks, they were 
finally liberated, with the exception of one, who had died in the interval To- 
ward the last of their imprisonment, they were treated kindly, owing totba 
exemplarv conduct of the Texans, as spoken of elsewhere. 

The fellow taus introduced, responding to the name of '* Old Bob," mada 
himself quite conspicuous by his subsequent conduct The gentleman in 
charge at Fort Lancaster, pitying his deplorable condition, kindly afEbrded 
him employment at a liberal compensation, and Old Bob set to work &itiH, 



THE WICKED SHALL NOT GO UNPUNISHED. ^1 

fully. In the coarse of twelve or fifteen days, however, be improved the 
opportunity of stealing a rifle and ammunition, with which he absconded 
ind set his face for the mountains. 

All that he now lacked to complete his equi|Mnent was a good horse, which 
Qsficiency seemed luckily made up by the discoveiy of one recently strayed 
ir>m the Indians. " I must have him," said Bob. So, carelessly droppmg 
hit rifle and pack, he commenced a fruitless efSsrt to capture the erratie 
steed. 

For a while his success seemed almost certain ; but, after a tedious trial 
for Beveral hours, he was finally obliged to relinquish the attempt, and turn- 
ed k> recover his rifle and pack. Alas, for Old Bob ! here an unlooked-for 
calamitv presented itself— they were not to be found ! 

Vainly it was that he searched diligently for four successive days, en* 
during in the mean time all the pangs of hunger and the goadings of a 
guilty conscience — his scrutiny gave not the slightest indication of their 
whereabouts. ^ Truly, ' the way of transgressors is hard !' " thought Bob^ 
as with reluctance he abandoned all,* and despairingly set his face to go^ 
ne knew not whither ! — half-starved and half-naked, with neither pistol, gun, 
nor butcher-knife, for his defence in a dangerous country ; nor one morsel 
to renew his strength by day, nor even a solitary rag to screen him from 
the chill air of night ! 

The next place at which Old Bob showed himself was at an Indian 
lodge, thither driven by the impulse of hunger — shaving starved for more 
than five successive days. Here he procured a temporary supply from the 
compassionate inmates, who also kinaiy gave him a robe. 

Nothing further was heard of him for eight or ten days, and the senex^ 
ally conceded opinion was, that he had either starved to death or had been 
killed by savages, when an express from tl^e Arkansas brought intelligence 
of having encountered him by the way. 

The luckless wight, after being without eating for five or six more days, 
had been robbed by tlie Apache Indians of everything about him except a 
pair of ragged pantaloons, and barely escaped from them with his life ! 
The express furnished him with a quantity of provisions, a pistol, robe, and 
ammunition, when, bidding him farewell, the two resimied their respective 
courses. 

From this date, his stoiy is briefly told. Pursuing his way toward the 
Arkansas, he soon after met a small party of Mexican traders, and, creep- 
ing upon their encampment at night, helped himself to a couple of horses. 
** It's a straight road that has no turns," muttered Old Bob, as he mounted 
one of them and returned to the Platte, where he bartered the other for a 
rifle and ammunition. 

For a brief interval he seemed to prosper in his iniquity, but erelong 
the tables were again turned upon him, and he experienced the literal fu> 
filment of that other declaration of holy writ which says, '^ The wicked 
shall not ffo unpunishecL" 

£lated by his recent success, he again started for the Arkansas, with 

* Two weeks subeequently, while on a hunting excursion, the person to whom the 
rtolen rifle belonged found it, with all the property of the liiief ; — a laoet KftaaalknUktf 
ctrcumstance, as the country had been filled with strolling Indians during the interviL 

29* 



S42 A PHOTRACTED MEETDfO. 

the intent of renewing his depredations, accompanied by two other adven- 
turers whom he bad pnrsnaded to become the partners of his criminal enter* 
prise ; but, before prcMceedinff &r, he fell in with the same company of Mex- 
ican traders from whom he nad stolen the horses. They immediately re> 
cognized him and the animal he rode, and took possession of the latter. 
As for Old Bob, notwithstanding his protestations of innocence and stoat 
resistance, they stripped him of ffon, pistol, and ammunition — gave bin a 
aevere flogging, and again tamed him adrift upon the prairie, destitute of 
everything except the oaseness of his own heart ! 

** Well, B^'* said one of his comrades ; *' this business appears not so 
wqfUable, after all ; though you, doubtless, have become quite vxtrmed in 
Its pursuit For my own part I shaU quit it before I begin, and return to 
the Stetes." 

•* And I, too ;" chimed in the other. 

**The fact is," replied Bob, " this country is getting rather too hot forme, 
and rU bear you company ! What d'ye say to that ?" 

^ Just as you like, responded his two companions ; '^ that is, provided 
yon wont attempt the grao game on us." 

"Come, boys; now that's too bad ! Oh, you may rest assured I will 
never repay a kindness with ingratitude, neither will I abuse the confidence 
of frienos." 

Thus arranged, the three started on their way. Coming upon a camp of 
hunters, a few miles below Bent's Fort, they concluded to remain a short 
time in order to procure a supply of meat for their journey. Here our slip- 
pery customer borrowed a horse and rifle of his comrade, pretendedly for a 
Dufialo hunt, and under a most solemn pledge of returning them ; how- 
ever, on finding himself again armed and mounted, he was not slow to im- 
prove the opportunity of bidding an abrupt farewell to the unsuspecting 
dupe, and resumed his course toward the States. 

How he eventually succeeded through this last shift, I am unable to say ; 
▼et, the brief story of his adventures Uius far is sufficient to prove, that 
iniquity sometimes, even in this life, receives a severe reward. 

Toward the last of August the Arapahoe and Chyennes held a grand 
convocation, in the vicinity of Fort Lisncaster, for the porpose of medicine^ 
making ; or, in other words, pairing tlieir united devotions to the Great 
Spirit. The gathering might with proi»iety have been termed a *^ Protract' 
ea Meeting,^* as it continued for three successive days and nights, exclusive 
of the time occupied in preliminary arrangements. 

Besides the two tribes above named, a large number of Sioux, Cuman- 
ches, Blackfeet, and Riccarees, were present, swelling the concourse to 
nearly a thousand lodges. 

The regular participants in the ceremonies of the occasion had pre- 
viously prepared themselves by a £Bist of three days, attended with fiequent 
washings and purifications. A large lodge had been erected in the 
form of an amphitheatre, as described upon a former page, with a pole in its 
centre pointing to the zenith, near the top of which was affixed the head 
of a buffiilo. Here the throng assembled, with up-turned eyes, enciicling 
ft around in solemn dance, accompanied by a low musical chant, as they 
•ddreased the ** Big Medicine.'' This strange worship was maintamed 



MAIN CHAIN OF THE BOCKT MOUNTAINS. 343 

day and night, without intennission^— the devotees meanwhile neither 
eating nor drinking. So exhausted were they, that at times, they fell from 
effects of weakness and fiitigae. 

Some of their performances savored much of Hindoo origin. Those 
wishing to be thought particularly good, attested their piety by cutting 
themselves in various places^— and, vet others, by drawing after them the 
heads of buflido fastened upon hooics inserted in their own flesh. As 
the exercises were about to close, an offering of blankets, robes, beads, 
tobacco, &C., was made to the Good Spirit, after which tl^e crowd di»- 
persed. 

Their object appeared to be a threefold one, viz : to do penance for sin, to 
thank the Author of Good for past &vors, and to implore a continuance of 
His beneficence for the future. 

The head around which they danced was evidently not the object of 
their veneration, but was placedf there simply to remind them that, as the 
buflTalo constituted their principal sustenance, the Grood Being should be 
more especially adored on its account 



^v 



A number of articles bavins disappeared from the Fort rather myste- 
riously, suspicion was fastened upon an Indian for appropriating them in 
the usual way. He was accordingly charged with the theft, but strongly 
affirmed his innocence, and, toplace the matter beyond doubt, took an oata 
in attestation of his words. The ceremony observed was as follows : 

Taking his bow, he selected the stoutest of his arrows, and, holding it 
in his right hand, pointed successively to the sky, the ground, and his own 
heart; then, kissing the bow, he again protested his innocence. This 
being considered satisfactory, he was honorably acquitted of the charge. 

An Indian is rarely known either to violate his oath or to swear faTsely, 
as in such a case he would be looked upon as beitfg irrecoverably exposed to 
the immediate wrath of heaven and the vengeance of man. The impoit of 
this ceremony may be expressed in these words : ^ Thou who dwellest in the 
air and earth, receive from me this arrow, and with this bow plunge it to 
my heart, if I do not speak the truth !" I leave the reader to judge in 
regard to the binding nature of its obligations. ^ 

Sept, 26th, Having purchased a horse for the purpose, I proceeded to 
the mountains on a hunting excursion, where, unattended by any one, I 
had a further opportunity of testing the varied sweets of solitude. 

My course lay directly west some eight miles to Soublet's creek, a con* 
siderable affluent of the Platte, heading at the base of Long's Peak,— 
thence, continuing up its right hand branch, I penetrated into the moun- 
tains, on the second day, a distance of several miles and camped. One of 
the passes to Grand river, which is generally thought much the neaiest 
loiite, leads up this branch. 

The interval from the 27th to the 30th was devoted to exploration, and 
I ascended the main chain of the mountains left of Long's Peak. The 
usual height of this ridge is about ten thousand feet, upon which the 
stem chambers of deathless winter are repeatedly exposed to the eye. 

The mountains and creeks' were well timbered, — ^the former with pine, 
cedar, and balsam, and the latter with Cottonwood, aspen, and box-elder« 



844 AGEU. 

Along the waitercouraes and intermingled with the rude arrav of hillf 
and rocks, were many beaatiful valleys, prairiilons^ and plateaux, all clothed 
with rank vegetation ; and, indeed, the soil of the entire section appeared 
tolerably fertile. 

The prevailing rock of this region is feldsphatic granite, gneiss, mica- 
ceous sandstone, and slate. These different classifications Qiere strowa 
about in confused piles, and there again towerins in massive walls of im- 
mense altitude) presented an impressively grand appearance, and united 
to render the ecenery one of varied subUmity and magnificence. 

Sept. ZOth. In the afternoon I raised camp and proceeded for ten or 
twelve miles, through a lm)ed opening between two mountain ridges, 
bearing a northwesterly direction, to a large valley skirting a tributary of 
Thompson's creek, where, finding an abundance of deer, 1 passed the in- 
terval till my return to the Fort 

Upon all the principal streams were large quantities of cherries and 
plums, which proved qmte acceptable. The cherry (cerasus virginiana) indi- 
genous to this country is quite similar in appearance to our common wild 
cherry, though it is genendlv larger and more pleasantly tasted. It grows 
upon a small bush, ami vields in lavish profusion. 

Three different varieties of plums are common to these parts, but are so 
nmilar in most respects to the wild species of that fruit found in our South- 
em and Western States, that I shall not take the trouble to describe them. 

The locality of my encampment presented numerous and varied attrac- 
tions. It seemed, indeed, like a c(»icentration of beautiful lateral valleys, 
intersected by meandering watercourses, ridged by lofty ledges of precip- 
itous rock, and hemmed in upon the west by vast piles of mountains 
climbing beyond the clouds, ana upon the north, south, and east, by sharp 
lines of hiUs that skirted Uie prairie ; while occasional onenincs, like gate- 
ways, pointed to the fiir-spreading domains of silence and loneliness. 

Easterly a wall of red sandstone and slate extended for miles north- 
ward and southward, whose counterscarp spread to view a broad and gen- 
tle declivity, decked with pines and luxuriant herbage, at the foot of which 
a lake of several miles in circumference occupies the centre of a basin- 
like valley, bounded in every direction by verdant hills, that smile upon 
the bright gem embosomed among them. 

This valley is five or six miles in diameter, and possesses a soil well 
adapted to cultivation. It also afS)rds every variety of game, whUe the 
lake is completely crowded with geese, brants, ducks, and gulls, to an ex- 
tent seldom witnessed. What a charming retreat for some one of the 
world-hating literati ! He might here hold £iily converse with himself, Nar 
ture, and his God, far removed from the annoyance of man. 

Four miles further north the traveller is brought to one of the main 
branches of Thompson's creek, up which is another pass to the waters of 
Grand river. 

This stream traces its way through a fertfle valley, two or three miles 
oroad, stretching from the prairie almost to the base of Long's Peak, — a dis- 
tance of nearly thirty miles. The valley is well timbered and admirably 
adanted to stock-raising. 

The hills and mountains, enclosing it upon each side are also studded 



NATURAL FOnnCATION. 



946 



tvith forests of pine and cedar, while the entire section is stored with all 
of the usaal varieties of game known to contiguous regions, in addition 
to its rich treasures of fruits, flowers and grasses. 

In surveying, from a commanding summit, the vast prairie skirting the 
muntain range upon the east, several small lakes are aiscemible at diflfei^ 
ent points. The water of these is usually brackish, and their shores, 
whitened by constant saline efflorescence, glisten in the sun*8 rays, and 
present a striking contrast with the surrounding verdure. 

The mind is perfectly astounded at the immense expanse thus brought 
within the scope of vision. In a clear day, objects favorably situated no 
larger than an ox or a horse, may be seen at a distance of twenty miles, 
and the timber of creeks even for sixty or seventy miles. Here the behoider 
may scale beyond the clouds far heavenward, and gaze upon a world at 
his feet! 

My hunting was confined principally to black-tailed deer. These ani- 
mals are mudi lai^r than others of the genus cervi, and their flesh is of a 
superior flavor. Their habits are similar to those of the wild sheep,-— 
leading them constantly to seek the regions of spring ; in the winter, de- 
scending to the valleys, and in the summer, keeping pace with the melt- 
ioffsnowB upon the mountain-sides. 

The extremity of their vertebne is shorter than that of other species of 
the deer family, and has upon it a small cluster of coarse, jetty hair, from 
which the animal derives its name. Their hair is usually of a dark brown . 
color, coarse and brittie, with the exception of a strip ot dirty white upon « 
the hams. Their ears are very large and long,— quite similar to those of 
a mule ; in other respects, however, they combrm to the peculiarities «f 
the common deer. 

I was quite successful with my rifle, and, bv degrees, became much 
attached to the versatile life of lordly independence consociate with the 
loneliness of my situation. My horse, too, seemed to have forgotten aU 
the allurements of former scenes, and presumed at no time to wander 
many yards from camp, — a peculiarity in this noble animal I have fre* 
, quently had occasion to remark. When thus alone, a horse will substi- 
tute the society of man for that of his own species, and, as if conscious of 
surrounding danger, will seldom leave the vicinity of a camp for a long 
distance. 

Oct, 29th, I started for tlie Fort. It had been my intention to visit 
a remarkable natural fortification upon one of the afiluents of Crow creek, 
but, ammunition failing, I was reluctantiy compelled to abandon it. 

This fortress is said to be complete in nearly all its parts, and capable 
of garrisoning a thousand men, yet even one or two hundred might defend 
it from the repeated assaults of vast armies, and, with a small amount of 
labor, misht render it impregnable. 

Its wiuls are huge masses of solid rock, one or two hundred feet in 
height, — apparentiy strata planted on end^— enclosing an area of several 
acres, unenterable except at limited openings. According to the glowin|r ^ 
descriptions of it given by hunters, it must be an object well worthy the "^2 
attention of the curious. 



848 FALSE ACCOUNTS. 

At toAtf I encamped at the base of the iBountainft, upon the right hand 
fork of Sottblet'a creek, and the next day reached the Fort. 

The last ten or twelve miles of the route (leading over an unbroken 
prairie) were travelled during a heavy fall of snow, which rendered the air 
ao dark it was impossible to see a dozen yards in advance. Bat what 
added still more to the uncertainty of my course was the frequent vari^ 
ance of the wind, changing the position of the grass, and otherwise in- 
creasing the constant liability to misjudge. Notwithstandmg these acco- 
mnktea difficulties, I struck the Platte river only half a mue bdow the in 
tended point 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

Newipapen. — ^Fabe report!.— Singular grane«.-«Sale of skins at Fort Lancaster.— An 
axcunion.— An incident.*— Camp. — ^Huge horns. — Leopard. — ^Pantberw— ^lang^ter 
of eagles. — ^Dressing skins. — ^The hunter's camp. — ^Vaaqaes' creek. — ^The weather^— 
Betum of comrades to Fort — Sweets of solitude. — Exposure in a snow-stomiw— 
Tlw canon of S. Fork Platte.— A ridge.— A valley.— Beautiful locality.— Choiee 
rite for a settlement — ^(lowers in February. — A hunting incident— Fkte of the pre- 
mature flowers. — Adventure with a sheep. — Discovered by Indians. — A pleasant 
meeting. — Camp at Crynal creek. — ^Thoughts of home. — ^Resolve on going. — Conh 
iMnce journey.— The caravan.—" Big Timber."— Country to the " Crossing."— 
Big Salt Bottom. — Flowers. — A stranger of other lands. — Difficulty with Indians. 
— " Friday." — ^Tedious travelling.— No timber. — ^Detention. — Country. — ^Pawnee 
Fork.. — ^Mountain and Spanish companies. — Spy Buck, the Sawnee war chief- 
Pawnee Fork. — Cure for a rattlesnake's bite. — Further detention. — Sketch of ad- 
jacent country. — PawUee Rocks.— En route with Friday. — Musquitoes. — Obaervap 
tions. — Friday as a hunter. 

The difl&rent trading companies had just arrived from the States, bring- 
ing their winter stock of goods, and, what was still more acceptable to me, 
a bundle of newspapers. Every item of intelligence contained in the lat^ 
ter was greedily devoured, but what aflbrded me no little amusement was 
the palpable falsity and ignorance their editors exhibited in relation to mat- 
ters of this country. 

For instance, in giving the particulars of the murder of Charvis, a Mezi 
can trader, which occurred in March, 1843, the crime was represented as 
having been committed near the Little Arkansas, by a party of Texaoa 
on £heir way to join Col. Warfield, who was then encamped in that vicinilii 
with forty men I whereas, at that time Col. Warfield had only nine mea 
wi& him, and was at least three hundred mUes from the Little Arkansas; 
and further, the murderers of Charvis loere not Texans ! 

Subsequently, an article in another paper came under my observation 
referring to a statement made to the National Institute, by an officer of the 



BEASTS OF PREY. M7 

United States Dngoonti, poYporting toffi^e a descriptioQ of the the hv^dio 
^rass common to the gnuid prairie. 'Hiis grass was represented as grow- 
ing six or eidit inches high, and as being abundant n the mountains, par" 
ticularly of New Mesco, where (if I rightly remember) it was said it r&- 
nained green the entire winter. The truth of the matter is, buffalo grast 
very rarely exceeds ttDo an^ never attains four inches in height,-*-is not 
found in the mountains at all, so far as my observation has exteivled, and 
is green only aboat one numlh in the year ! 

By the way, speaking of grass reminds me of a remarkable characteristic 
in some varieties indigenous to this country, and which will ailbrd matter 
of speculation to the inquiring mind. The blade, killed by the irost of 
winter, is resuscitated in the spring and gradually becomes green from the 
loot up, without casting its stubble or emitting new shoots I 

The skins obtained during my hunt found a ready sale, at prices ranging 
ffom one to three dollars each, according their to quality and condition* 
These articles were in great demand for the manufacture of clothing among 
the Fort hands, and are considered far preferable to cloth. 

Nov, 10th. I again returned to the mountains, heading a small party 
that insisted upon bearing me company. Late in the afternoon of the se- 
cond day we made camp in a valley, behind the first ridge of hills, upon 
the right hand fork of Soublet*s creek. 

An incident en route aflbrded some little amusement at the time. We 
had left the Fort without provisions, and I accordingly proceeded a short 
distance in advance for the purpose of killing antelope. Hiding slowly on, 
I noticed a badger not far sibead, and dismounted to shoot him. But the 
creature becoming alarmed sprang for his hole, and T hastened to stop 
him. This I effected by tightly grasping his tail as he was in the very 
act of entering his burrow. In the chase my rifle had accidentally dis- 
charged itself, and here commenced a struggle between me and the badger, 
— ^I to retain my hold while I unbelted my pistol to dispatch him, and he to 
enforce his liberty. At length I succeeded, and a choice supper was made 
from his carcase, which, to all intents, was the fattest thing I ever saw. 

We remained encamped at the place above named for some six weeks, 
and devoted the interval principally to hunting sheep, of which there 
were vast numbers in the neighborhood. In attestation of the monstrous 
horns borne by some of them, I need only mention the simple fact of my 
having killed three sheep while here whose horns measured nineteen 
inches in circumference, and nearly three feet in length. 

One of our party encountered a strange looking animal in his excur- \ 
sions, which, from his description, must have been of the leopard fatnily* 
This circumstance is the more remarkable, as leopards are rarely f6und 
except in southern latitudes. However, they are not unfrequently met 
with in some parts of the Cumanche country, and their skins famish to y 
the natives a favorite material for arrow-cases. 

,The only beast of prey other than wolves, encountered during the 
entire winter, was a solitary panther, whose extreme shyness defied all 
attempts to approach within shooting distance. 



8*^ CAMP OF THE MOUNTAIN HUNTER. 

My more lengthy ramUes brought me to a large valley immured by lat* 
eral hills, that mtd been occupied a short time previous by a party of In« 

^dians, for the purpose of ea^rle-catching. As proof of their success, I 
counted the boaies of thirty-six eagles, lying in piles at their recent camp. 
These consisted of the only two varieties found in the mountains, viz : tbs 
American and bald eagle. The wing«feathe|s of these Inrds command a 
ready sale amcmg the Indians, by whom they are highly prized for the em- 

\ pluming of arrows. 

The usual mode of dressinjg skins, prevalmit in this country among both 
Indians and whites, is very simple in its details and is easily practis^ 

It consists in removinff ail the fleshy particles from the pelt, and divest- 
ing it of a thin viscid substance upon the exterior, known as the *' grain ;** 
then, after permitting it to dry, it is thoroughlv soaked in a liquiddecoc- 
tion formed from the brains of the animal and water, when it is stoutly 
rubbed with the hands in order to open its pcnres and admit the moliient 
noperties of the fluid, — this done, the task is completed by alternate rub* 
hxiffs and distensions until it is completely dry and soft. 

& this manner a skin may be dressed in a very short time, and, on ap- 
]^cati(m of smoke, will not become hardened from any subsequent contact 
^ with water. 

The winteivcamp of a hunter of the Rocky Mountains would doubtless 
INTove an object of interest to the unsophisticated. It is usually located m 
some spot sheltered by hills or rocks, for the double purpose of securii^ 
the full warmth of the sun's rays, aiui screening it fix>m the notice of stroll 
ing Indians that may happen in ite vicinity. Within a convenient prox* 
imity to it stands some grove, from which an abundance of dry fuel is pro- 
curable when needed ; and equally close the ripplings of a watercourse salute 
the ear with their music. 

His shantee &ces a huse fire, and is formed of skins carefullv extended 
over an arched frame-wo» of slender poles, which are bent in the form of 
a semicircle and kept to their places by inserting their extremities in the 
ground. Near this is his '* graining block," plant^ aslope, for the ease of 
the operative in preparing his skins for the finishing process in the art of 
dressing ; and not far removed is a stout frame, contrived from four pieces 
of timber, so tied together as to leave a square of sufficent dimensions tor the 
required purpose, in which, perchance, a skin is stretohed to its fullest ex- 
tension, and the hardy mountaineer is busily engaged in rubbing it with a 
rough stone or ^' scraper," to fit it for the manufacture of clothing. 

fucing his shantee upon tlie opposite side of the fire, a pole is reared upon 
eiotofaes five or six feet high, across which reposes a choice selection of 
the dainties of his range, to wit: the " side ribs," shoulders, heads, and 
•* rump-cute" of deer ana sheep, or the " d^pouille" and " fleeces" of buf- 
falo. The camp-fire finds busy employ in fitting for the demands of appe* 
tite such dainty bits of hissing roasts as en appolas may grace ite sides , 
while, at brief intervals, the hearty attendant, enchaired upon the head of « 
nountain sheep, (whose huge horns furnish less and arms for the ccmve* 
nience of sitting,) partakes of his tempting lunch. 

Carefully hung in some fitting place, are seen his ** riding'* and ** pack 



EXPOSURE IN A SNOW-STORM. 349 

saddles," with his halters, " cavraces," " larrietts," ** apishamores," and all 
the needful materiel for camp and travelling service; and, adjoining him at 
no great distance, his animals are allowed to graze, or, if suitable nourish* 
roent of other kind be lacking, are fed from the bark of cottonwood trees 
levelled for that propose ; and, leaning close at hand, his rifle awaits his 
use, and by it his powder-horn, bullet-pouch, and tomahawk. 

Thus conditioned are these lordly rangers in their mountain home, not *^ 
own that any creature of human kind can possibly enjo}^ life better than 
they. 

The events of each day varied so litde in their nature, that a minute no- 
tice of them would prove uninteresting to the general reader. Suffice it to 
say, we remained here till Jan. Ist, 1844, and then lemoved to Vasques', 
creek, some thirty-five miles further south, where we encamped in the val- 
ley that formed my hunting ground of the previous winter. 

The weather continued cold, and several falls of snow had occurred, 
covering the prairies to the depth of six or seven inches, and the moun- 
tains to the depth of many feet, though it rarely rem&ined in the warm 
valleys and upon the sunny side-hills to exceed three successive hours. 

Our camp, as a general thing, was quite favorably situated in reganl 
to temperature ; the day time frequently affording a spring-like warmth, 
though the nights were usually cold. 

A peculiar species of grass among the hills retained its verdancy the 
entire season, as did also another variety in the valleys. Our horses and 
mules continued to thrive and even fatten upon the nourishing herbage 
thus afforded by these secret chambers of spring. 

Soon after our removal to Vasques' creek, three Indians, from a 
neighboring village, paid us a visit, who brought vague information of the 
approximity of the Sioux, which so excited the apprehension of my camp- 
n^ates relative to their own safety and that of their animals, that they 
were not satisfied to remain here any longer, and accordingly left for the 
Fort. Wishing to ascertain the true situation and locality of such suspi- 
cious neighbors, I proceeded to the Indian village for that purpose. The 
report proved unfounded ; but yet my extra-prudential comrades were 
unwilling to compromise their own safety by a further hunt, and argued 
stoutly to persuade me to accompany them beyond the reach of danger. 

In the morning, however, as all were ready to resume their journey, 1 
mounted my horse, and, bidding them adieu, with my lead pack-animal 
returned to the mountains, resolved on a further test of the sweets of 
loneliness. 

Remaining at our former camp for a week or more, I enjoying full 
scope for my trusty rifie among the vast quantities of deer which showed 
themselves in every direction ; and, in one of my many excursions, pene- 
trated to the head valley of Vasques* creek ; — ^being belated on my return 
by killing a very fat deer, I was forced to pass the night among the moun- 
tains, wiuiout even a robe or a blanket to screen me from the severities of a 
pitiless snow-storm that fell in the mean time. Strange as it mav aeem^ I 
experienced not the shghtest ill e£fect in consequence. ^m 



MO EARLY SPRINa 



On remoTing from my old hunting grounds, I halted at two or three dii- 
fsrent points still further south, upon small affluents of the Platte, and 
in the course of twenty.five days encamped a few miles below the exit of 
the main stream from the mountains, in an opening made by the forced 
passage of a large creek into the prairie through a sharp line of hills. 

The scenery in the vicinity of this camp was romantic, wild, and beauti- 
fnl. The ridge thus bisected was about four hundred feet in heighth, and 
exposed to the creek vast mural cWSa of limestone and sandstone that 
formed a gateway nearly three hundred yards wide. It ranged paral- 
lel with the mountains, two miles or more removed from them, presenting 
to the prairie a gentle escarpment ornamented with scattering pines and 
clothed at intervals with rank grasses of the preceding year's growth. 

On ascending to its summit von stand at the verge oi a steep precipice, 
two hundred or more feet in descent, — as if the earth, opened by internal 
convulsions, had forced the right valve of its fissure to an unnatural posi- 
tion, and thus formed the elevation beneath you. 

This ridge extends for many miles, and overlooks a beautiful valley of 
remarkable fertility, fifteen miles in length by three in breadth, and inter- 
sected by numerous streams, more or -less timbered, that find their way 
from the mountain side. The valley is divided by a continuous ridge that 
nins parallel with its length, which is much the same in character with, 
though more diminutive in size than the one previously described. 

The huge masses of red granitic sandstone that tower to a surprising 
akitade, isolated and in almost every conceivable form and shape, add 
TasUv to the wildness of the place. The rock is quite friable and con- 
fltantiy yielding to the action of the weather, while the soil of the valley is of 
a ruddy color and gravelly nature as will be readily inferred from the above 
&ct. 

This superfice is fertilized, not only from the debris of its rocks, bat 
by the immense bods of gypsum contained in its hill-sides, which are in- 
cessantly decomposing to enhance the general fecundity. Vegetation, of 
course, must attain a rank growth in such a soil, and, in £Eivored spots, it 
remains green the entire year. 

All the dififerent varieties of wild fruits and game indigenous to the moun- 
tains are found here in g^eat abundance. Among the timber of the creek 
bottom, I noticed hazel-bushes, old acquaintances of the States, which 
looked like messengers from a &r off country, and reminded me of other 
scenes. 

There are few localities in the vicinity of the mountains better situated 
for a small settlement, or possessed of greater agricultural advantages than 
this. 

The prairie at the base of the first range of hills is quite saline in its 
character ; and several small lakes of brackish water, and well stocked 
with almost numberless water-fowl, are seen at different points, the incrus- 
tations upon whose shores assume a snowy whiteness. Notwithstanding 
this, it possesses a good soil and is admirably adapted to the growth d 
stock, t 

Feb, 26th, The fresh grass upon the hill-sides has assumed a thrifty 
appearance. Insects have begun to quit their winter retreats, and, com- 



ADVENTURE WITH A SHEEP. 351 

mingling their shrill notes with the music of birds, hail the approaching 
spring. ' I was delighted to find in my rambles a cluster of wild-flowera 
iii full bloom, shedding their fragrance to the breeze from a sweet* sunny 
SDot among the hills, and I sat for a time to admire its new-bom loveli. 
ness. 

One of my horses, having been for some time wasting under the effects 
of a disease peculiar to those animals, died tins afternoon, — a loss which 
subjects me to no little inconvenience. It was a noble beast, and cost me 
sixty dollars only four months since. 

Feb. 28//i. A light snow which fell yesterday night prevented me from 
leaving catap, but having shouldered my rifle early this morning, I ranged 
along tlie valley. The enow had entirely disappeared. Three butSilo 
bulls, alarmed at my approach, rushed down a steep hill-side, quartering 
towards me, at the height of their speed. Running to intercept them, 1 
shot as they passed, prostrating one at the instant. So great was tlie im- 
petuosity of his headway, the carcase was thrown to the very base of the 
descent, a distance of about three hundred yards ! 

The interest awakened by the picture of loveliness that greeted me two 
days previous, led again to the sweet spot among the rough hill-sides, — but, 
how changed ! The cruel frost had done his death- work — ^the " flowers 
had withered and the beauty thereof Jiad fallen away." A tear to their 
memory, despite my efforts to restrain it, stole its way to the ground. 
Such was the fate of the first flower of spring ! What a prolific theme 
for a melancholy fancy to brood upon, and, in its musings, catch the inspi- 
rations of poesy ! 

March 4th The dull monotony of four days past has afforded nothing 
worthy of note. Spring is making rapid advances. To-day, however, an 
incident occurred, which, with suitable forethought, might have been turned 
to grood account. Soon after leaving camp I encountered a band of sheep, 
and, despairing of a near approach, shot one of its number at a distance 
of nearly three hundred and fifty yards. The animal immediately fell, 
having been stunned by a neck wound, {^^ creased,") but recovered as I 
reached it,barely affording me time to grasp one of its legs. 

Here commenced a struggle, — the sheep to get free, and I to retain my 
hold. In the energy of its efforts I was dragged over the rocks for some 
two hundred yards, w^hen, having caught its fore-leg, I succeeded in 
throwing it, and unthinkingly despatched it with my butcher-kni fe. I migit" 
have preserved it alive, as a rare and valuable addition to some zoological 
collection. My not having done so, I regretted the more, as it was a 
female and would have soon produced another of its species. 

March lih. leaving discovered a large band of deer in the prairie 
towards the Platte, early this morning I started to approach them. JBeing 
within the required distance, I was preparing to shoot, when, on glancing 
to tiie left:, a party of horsemen met my view, advancing at full gallop. 
Their bare heads and fluttering robes at once announced them Indians. 

Here was a dilemma ! My first thought was to retire to the creek and 
there await them, under cover of the trees, — but this would convey an im 



3fi2 RBMARya. 

pression of cowardice, a thing which uniformly receives ill treatment at 
the hands of Indians, while bravey commands their respect. I tiierefore 
resolved to stand my ground and jQght it out, if necessary, let the conse- 
qnences be what they would. So, after examining the condition of my 
firearms and making the suitable arrai^ments for an expected rencoan- 
ter, I calmly awaited their approach. My design was to shoot the fore- 
most when within proper distance, (first forbidmng their advance,) then, 
havin^f discharged my pistols at the two next, if not previously killed, to 
close m with the remainder, butcher-knife in hand. From hostile savages I 
expected no quarter, and was therefore determined to sell my life as dearly 
as possible. 

A nearer approach, however, changed my gloomy apprehensions into a 
tnmsport of pleasure, as I recognizedtwo old hunters from Fort Lancaster 
at their head, — the first of human beings, white or Indian, that I had seen 
for two months. Their gratification scarcely surpassed my own, they having 
long since supposed me murdered by prowling savages. 

Having camped the day previous about three miles distant with the par- 
ty accompanying them, they were now in quest of bufiklo. However, as 
it threatened to be unpleasant weather, an invitation to my camp was 
gladly accepted, where the choice stores my larder afforded, were dis- 
cussed with epicurean gusto. 

Yielding to their persuasions, in the afternoon I bid adieu to my lovely 
retreat and proceedcMl with them to their encampment upon the opposite 
side of the Platte, near the mouth of Crystal creeK. 

Here a small party of whites fiom the Fort were occupied in building a 
boat, with which to descend the river. A Mexican woman, from Taos, the 
wife of an engage, honored the scene with her presence, as did also three 
Bquaws and two Indians. Commodious shantees had been erected for the 
accommodation of the men, which, together with a huge fire and a propor- 
tionate pile of meat, imparted an air of comfort to everything. 

Remaining here for a week or two, I then proceeded to the Fort, a dis- 
tance of about forty miles. The different trading companies were already 
en route for the States, having left several days previous. The thoughts of 
other lands, and more congenial associations, were now revived in sdl their 
vividness. They filled my mind by day, and crowded my dreams by night 
Eight years had already intervened since the view of a distant home and 
much-loved childhood scenes had last greeted me, nearly three of which 
had been pa^ised amid the dangers and vicissitudes of prairie and mountain 
life. Yet, I was at a loss to decide what to do. The object of my excui^ 
sion had not been satisfactorily accomplished. I wished to visit the Pacific 
and fiimiliarize myself more perfectly with several parts of Oregon ana 
California ; this would yet require a year, or even more. 

However, the subject now uppermost in my thoughts influenced the de- 
cision, and, bidding a present aidieu to other plans, I made. prompt arrange- 
ments for returning to the States. These were soon completed, and on tbe 
17th of March I commenced my journey. 

With the intermediate country from the Platte to Bent's Fort dk the Ar- 
Kansasthe reader is already familiar; and, as few incidents worw'of note 
occurred between these two pomts, I shall content myself wi^ a meie 



A RARE CUSTOMER. 358 

passing notice and hasten with becoming brevity to a conclusion of the 
task in hand. 

The fourth day succeeding my departure I overtook a division of the 
caravan of mountain traders, numbering ten men and three waggons, with 
which I proceeded to the 3ig Timber of the ArkansHs, distant about two 
hundred miles southeast from Fort Lancaster. 

The country at this place, in the immediate vicinity of the river, is fertile 
and well timbered, but the prairies are slightly undulating, arid, and gener- 
ally unproductive. The prevailing rock is exhibited in abrupt cliUs and 
bold escarpments from the hili-sides and banks of watercourses, and con- 
sists of various conglomerates, with limestone and sandstone ; the latter being 
very fine-grained and admirably suited to the preparing of edgetools. I 
noticed indications of coal in some parts, and the usual quantity of saline 
efflorescences, particularly upon the south side of the river. 

On the 10th of April, the caravan being augmented by an accession of 
three other waggons and several men, we agam resumed our journey, and, 
on the 28th inst, struck the Santa Fe trail near the Crossing of the Arkan- 
sas, one hundred and ten miles below the Big Timber. 

The geological character of the prairie and the river bottoms is much 
the same as that previously described, with the exception of a general scar- 
city of rock ; though to the southward it is veiy sterile in appearance, and 
a continuous chain of hills, that in some places are mere knobs of naked 
sand entirely destitute of every semblance of vegetation, plainly points out 
the cheerless llanos of the Great American Desert. 

Below the Big Timber the rank growths of absiniket which have been 
heretofore so prevalent, almost entirely disappear. 

The river gradually expands to the width of nearly two miles, forming 
several small islands, and scatters its waters in numerous channels, over 
beds of quicksand, so shallow and variable as to preclude the possibility 
of successful navigation. 

Timber becomes very scarce, — so much S0|^ that in many places it is 
difficult to obtain a sufficiency even for the camp-fires of travellers. The 
bottoms are usually broad and fertile, but possess a highly saline cha* 
meter. 

One of the above, known as the Big Salt Bottom, is some forty miles 
in length and four or five miles broad. It contains frequent streams and 
pools of brackish water, with spots in which vegetation entirely gives 
place to thick coatings of mineral salts. 

Among the prairie hills I occasionalJy noticed extensive spreads com- 
pletely covered with a singular species of blue fiower in full bloom, 
which imparted to the otherwise forbidding prospect an air of loveliness 
and beauty; but, in glancing over the far-reaching landscape, I looked in 
vain for the floral attractions peculiar to mountain regions. 

A few miles above the Crossing, an incident occurred which renewedly 
aroused my recollection of other lands. This was the appearance of a 
fine-looking coon, the first I bad seen since leaving the States. These 
animals are strangers to the mountains, and were never before known to 
penetrate thus far westward. 

30* 



354 MEETING OF COMPANIES. 

In paacing a village of Arapahoe, near the Salt Bottom, we had cod- 
Biderabie ditficulty with them on account of ten or fifteen domesticated 
buffiilo connected with the caravan. The Indrans were highly exaspera- 
ted, and accused the whites of stealing their bufialo. They even armed 
themselves lo fight ns, and were deterred from their purpose only by a large 
present of tobacco, but still threatened vengeance in case of a renei^al of 
the ofience. 

Soon aiter this we were joined by a young Arapaho Indian, named Fri- 
day, who was desirous of visiting the States. He had formerly lived in 
St Louis, where he had acquired a knowledge of tlie English language, 
and still maintains a reputation for honesty, intelligence, and sobriety. 
Hereafter I will have occasion to speak of him more particularly, in con- 
nection with his previous history. 

Resuming our course, we bore leftward from the river and struck into 
the high prairie. Late rains had rendered the ground muddy, and travel- 
ling consequently became slow and tedious. 

The weather continued wet and disagreeable, in addition to which the 
unprecedented size and velocity of the streams caused us frequent deten- 
tion. 

The trail, for four or five days, led over a number of timberless water- 
courses, known as " the coon creeks," which subjected us to great incon- 
venience in the item of fuel, as neither tree nor stick could be procured 
for cooking purposes, and bois de bache, the substitue of bufialo countries, 
had become so thoroughly saturated with water it was almost impossible to 
ignite it. 

On the 23d of April, having arrived at Pawnee Fork, we were obliged 
to remain some four weeks before a tbrd could be effected, — but the dense 
bandb of bufiklo that thronged the vicinity abated somewhat the annoyance 
of delay. 

The country, between the "Crossing" and Pawnee Fork, varies but 
little in its general character from that previously described, and exhibits a 
&vorable contrast to the forbidding wastes of naked sand upon the oppo- 
site side of the Arkansas. Although not absolutely sterile, it is not rich, 
and suffers more from lack of moisture than any actual defect of soil 
Its entire destitution of timber will prevent it from ever becoming inhab- 
ited to any great extent. 

Rock of all kinds is very scarce, and almost the only specimens prevar 
lent are found in the pebbles and diminutive fragments wmch He scattered 
over the prairie. ^ 

' During our stay we were joined by Messrs. Bent and St Vrain, and 
three or four Spanish companies, which increased our caravan to fifty or 
more waggons and nearly one hundred men. 

With the former of the companies was a Chyenne chief, (Slim Face,) on 
Ins way to Washington to soUcit the U. S. Government to adopt some effecfr 
val means for the suppression of the sale oi ardent spirits among his 
people. (A very laudable object, indeed.) 



PAWNEE ROCKS. 355 

Three or four Mexican ladies and several children (being the family of 
one of the Spanish traders, from Chihuahua) were also included with the 
new accession ; but the most noted personage among the whole was Old 
Spy Buck, the famous Shawnee war-chief, who had distinguished himself 
as the leader of a small band of his countrymen in connection with Kirker 
and the Americans employed by the governments of Santa Fe and Chihu- 
ahua to fight the Apache and Navijo Indians. 

The old chieftain was on his return home, venerable in age and covered 
with scars, which gave indubitable evidence of the place he had occupied in 
the hour of danger. The history of his exploits would fill a volume far 
more interesting in its details than those of the proudest heroes of fiction. 

Pawnee Fork afforded an inexhaustible supply of cat-fish, which were 
caught in great numbers by our party. I know of no other stream near, 
upon the Atlantic side of the mountains, where fish are found in any quan- 
tity or size worth naming. 

This creek heads at the eastern extremity of the " Divide," in the 
vicinity of tlie Smoky Hill branch of the Kansas, and by pursuing a south- 
ern course for about one hundred and fifty miles, finds its discharge in the 
Arkansas. It is heavily timbered, and is known among the Indians as Otter 
creek, on account of the great number of those animals found upon it. 
The valley which skirts it is several miles broai, and very fertile, present- 
ing a large extent of excellent land, well adapted to cultivation. 

While here, I became acquainted with the salutary properties 6f gun- 
powder in an interesting case. My horse, havuig been bitten by a rattle- 
snake, was cured by Sie following simple process : The wound being 
slightly creased immediately above and below, a small portion of powder 
was burnt upon it for four or five times in succession, which completely 
destroyed the effects of the poison. I am informed by those who have 
repeatedly tried this remedy, that it has never been known to fail when 
promptly applied. 

On the 21st of May, we finally effected a crossing, and by the 24th haa 
reached Walnut creek, twenty miles distant, where high water again op- 
posed a present barrier to further progress. The bottoms were so com- 
pletely flooded that we were forced to occupy an adjoining eminence for a 

camp. 

This stream is heavily timbered, and derives its name from the abun- 
dance of black walnut found along its banks. Its valley is very similar to 
that of Pawnee Fork as regards size and fertility, while the country be- 
tween the two,is evidently possessed of a good soil. *; 

About twelve miles below Walnut creek, near the trail, is a huge and 
isolated mass of coarse sandstone, known as the Pawnee Rocks. This is 
a noted landmark, and, like Independence Rock elsewhere spoken of, is 
covered with the names of passers by, en route to and from the mountains 

and Mexican States. t^ ,. i -n i. a . i. 

Here was a confused medley of cognomens,— Enghsh, J? rench, Spanish,. 
German, Irish, and Scotch,— all entered upon the register of fancied immor- 
tality; and here, too, as I glanced over the strange catalogue, a number of oar 



856 •• FRIDAY." 

—I ll L J, J J- L I - JUL -nj-J « I'll "" !' ' ii ' i " " ' ' .-..-. .......■-.■.«■..■■.■.. ......-.■ .1 



eompaDj were buBily engaged 
former resolation. I declined tfa 



fonner resolation, I declined the honor of imitating their example. 

JuTie 16/^ More than three weeks have intervened since oar arrival Ht 
Walnut creek, and still there is no present possibility of proceeding with 
the waggons. This continued delay is becoming extremely irksome, not- 
withstanding the countless thousands of buflalo which afiord us an inex- 
haustible feast of '* &t things.** Time is precious and I must go on ; atid 
there are several who would do likewise, but hesitate, — ^while frightful vis- 
ions of Pawnees and Osages disturb their midnight dreams and fluster 
•their waking thoughts. Friday, the Arapaho, asks to accompany me ;— 
our arrangements are completed, and to-morrow we leave. 

June Vltlu About noon, bidding adieu to vexatious hindrances, we 
started, and, after a short ride, forded the Arkansas above the mouth of Wal- 
nut creek^-Uhence, following the course of that river upon its opposite 
bank, we halted for the night m a broad sandy bottom, four or five miles be- 
low. 

The musquetoes here proved so troublesome to ourselves and animals, 
we were compelled to defend the former by means of a dense smoke and pro- 
tect the latter with a close envelope of robes. The next morning we re- 
crossed the Arkansas, and, striking the waggon road soon after near Plum 
Butte, continued our way to Cow creek. 

A few miles above this point the regular trail leaves the Arkansas upon 
the right, and, following a northwesterly course for about three hundred and 
fifty miles, strikes the States at Indenendence, Mo. 

The interval between Walnut and Cow creeks is generally sandy and 
■omewhat tumulous, but is different in many respects from any other sec- 
lion previouslv noticed. The hills, adjacent to the river and near the 
trail, are coniform and not unfrequently naked piles of dry sand, while tbe 
hollows and depressions among them aflford a humid soil, coated widi rank 
vegetation 

Cow creek is a small stream with very steep, clayey banks, and is 
sparsely timbered. Its bottom is about four miles broad and of variable 
fertility, — doubtless susceptible of cultivation. 

On resuming our course we leave the buf&lo region, a transition for which 
we are now fuUy prepared. Aware that this must shortly occur, I had sent 
Friday in advance with my rifle, who very soon prostrated three fine bulls, 
aflfording us a stock of most excellent beef fix>m which to make our selec- 
tions. 

Few Indians or whites can compete with Friday as a buflalo-hunter, 
either in the use of the bow or rifle. I have seen him kill five of these 
animals at a single chase, and am informed that he has not unfrequently 
exceeded that number. Conscious skill, in this respect, is the occasion 
of some little pride to its possessor. 

But it is not in hunting exploits alone that he excels ; his deeds of war 
equally command the respect and admiration of his tribe, among whom he 
is known as the *• Arapaho American." A brief sketch of his early life 
I have reserved for the succeeding chapter, which the reader may rely apoq 
a« Btrietiy true. 



867 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

The Arapabo American, a sketch of real life.— Tenets of the mountain Indians in 
reference to a future state of rewards and punishments. — ^The " water bull." — 
Country between Cow creek and Council Grove. Inviting locality for settle- 
ment. — Sudden rise of water. — Separate routes. — ^Dangerous travelling. — Osage 
village. — Osages, and all about them. — ^Arrival at Van Buren, Arkansas. — Con- 
cluding remarks. 

Early in the year 1828, ere peace had been established between the 
whites and the Arapahos, a large village of that tribe made its temporary 
encampment upon the waters of the Cimarone, in the vicinity of the 
Santa Fe trail. 

An opportunity so favorable for amusement was not suflered long to pass 
unimproved by the younger ones, and group after group of merry boys 
and girls were soon bescattered over the acyoinmg prairie, engaged in their 
innocent sports, — ^for of play all children possess an intuitive fondness, be 
they white, red, or black. 

£ach successive day yielded its tribute to the routine of pleasure, as, true 
to the teachings of childish philosophy, they seized the enjoyments of the 
present, nor thought or cared for the future, — and thus £aLr, it may be said, 
some men are but overgrown boys. 

Impelled by the resUess spint of their years, on an occasion, several 
frolicksome lads had wandered to an unusual distance from camp, and 
passed most of the day in a fruitless e£S)rt to catch prairie-dogs. 

At length, wearied with a bootless task, they set their faces homeward. 
Scarcely had they started, however, when the village made its appear- 
ance, bearing directly towards them; whereupon the happy beuid, seat- 
ing ^emselves at the point of an eminence, awaited its approach, and 
soon mingled with their relatives, one after another, as they were dis- 
closed by the passing throng. 

In a short time a Tittle boy, some six years old, alone remained — ^watch- 
ing with eager impatience the appearance of his father's lodge ; but still 
it came not. The crowd had passed and a solitary old man brought up 
the rear. On seeing the lone stripling, he enquired the cause of his 
delay. 

"My parents come not, and I await them," said the little fellow. 

<* Haste you,'' replied the man ; '' they have gone towards the sun-rising 
for a day's travel. Run quick, that you may join them." 

The lad promptly followed the old man's direction, and set off in pui- 
Buit His route led over a Ions reach of dry sand-prairie, eastward of 
the Cimarone, which was entirely destitute of water, and soon after crosb- 
ing the creek a heavy wind obscured the trail,'«in addition to which the 
thick clouds of dust, with fast-closing night and insufierable thirst coro- 
' polled him to turn again to tiiie Cimarone. 



358 THE ARAPAHO AMEBICAN. 

Another a4tempt to reach the village the day following was unsaccesa- 
lul, and each repeated effi>rt proved equally unavailing. 

At length, ^^kened by hunger and suffering, he laid himself down to 
die, in a grass plat by the creek side. 

Seven days of continued fasting which followed, left him so debilitated 
he could scarcely stand. His mind began to wander ; he thought himself a 
dweller of the Spirit Land and a ranger of the hunting ground of happy 
souls. 

His bewildered vision pictured the joyous chase, bounding along the 
celestial plains. Strange voices greeted his ear, and sounds oroke upon 
the stillness of solitude. He gazes around, and sig(its still stranger close 
in upon him, — not visionary, but real. 

'* It must be so," said he. '* Here are the horses for me to ride, and 
there is the game for me to chase. But, what singular buflklo ! How 
long their horns, and how white ! — ^What strange colors, too ! — white, red, 
black, and mixed ! And, who are they ? — Ah ! the pale-faces ! They ap- 
proach ! What do they here ? — I cannot escape them !" Thereupon he 
tound himself in the firm grasp of two white men, who cut short his solilo- 
quy by bearing him to their camp. 

His fancy, though illusive in its inception, had ended in sober reality. 
The Strang^ voices greeting his ear were those of his captors, who had 
just encamped near him ; the horses and singular bufialo exciting his won- 
der, w6re the horses and cattle of a caravan of Santa Fe traders ; and the 
pale-faces were two of the company, by the names of Fitzpatrick and Souh- 
let, by whom he was taken. 

They were on their return to the States, andi noticing a strange object in 
the vicinity of camp soon after their noon halt, approached to learn its 
character and found the little sufferer as above relatecl. 

lie had never before seen the whites, and, knowing them only from the 
representations of his people, they were associated in his boyish fancy with 
all that was hateful and wicked. But, instead of the cruel death he had 
supposed would be his certain allotment at their hands, they administered to 
his wants and plied him with kindnesses. Everything about him was so 
strange, he could scarcely be convinced it was not a picture of the imagina- 
tion — that he was not yet dreaming of the happy country, or actually initi- 
ated into its delightful mysteries. 

From the date of this event he was ushered into a new state of exist- 
ence, and soon acquired the language and habits of the whites. Taken to 
St. Louis, he remained there for some five years, and received a partial ed- 
ucation during the interval. So complete was the transformation, be even 
forgot the name and language of his nation, and became an adept in the 
customs of civilized life. 

About the year 1832, Capt. Grant succeeded in effecting a treaty with 
the Arapahos, and pending its negotiation mention was made of a boy, said 
to have been lost upon the Cimarone several years previous, who was sup- 
posed to have fallen into the hands of a trailing company, and for whose 
ransom a large number of horses was offered. 

It is needless to say our hero was the subject of this request, and, in or- 
der to conciliate their good will and place the new-formed treaty upon* 



RELIGIOUS TENETS OF MOUNTAIN TRIBES. 359 

pennanent basis, word was forwarded to his benefactor, Fitzpatrick, inform- 
in^him of the circamstance. 

Friday, for this was the name by which the Indian youth had now be- 
come known, on hearin? the proposal of his relatives, steadily refused com- 
pliance, declarinir the whites to be his only relatives, and tiiiat with them he 
woald live and die. 

Subsequently, however, he was persuaded to accompany his guardian to 
the mountains, expecting shortly to revisit the States. Here his father and 
mother came forward to claim him as their Ions-lost son. 

But the lapse of seven years had served to eSace all the recollections of 
early childhood. Parents and friends were alike strangers to him ; he re- 
fused to own them, and recoiled from their advances. Their language 
grated upon his fear in a confused jargon of unknown sounds. His mother 
wept from mingled emotions of grief and joy, while his father and brothers 
pressed their mouths in unfeigned astonishment. Still his obstinacy was 
unyielding, and the united entreaties of relatives failed to exert upon him 
the least influence. 

At length, the arguments and advice of the fur traders induced him to 
visit the Arapahos village, where he was received with distinguished honor 
by his relatives and nation. Every one hastened to pay him respect, — 
while feast succeeded feast, and council succeeded councU, to welcome his 
return, and the little boy, who, seven years before — lost amid the cheerless 
sands of the American Desert, and weakened by hunger and suffering- 
had lain down to die upon the bank of the Cimarone, now found himself 
suddenly made famous as the " Little Chief " of his tribe, — ^the " Arapaho 
American." 

Honor, whose potent spell exerts its influence upon older heads and 
more enlightened minds, gradually reconciled him to the rude mode of life 
his destiny seemed to mark out, and he again became identified with the 
associations of former years. 

Still, however, he retains an undiminished attachment to the whites, and 
continues to merit and command their esteem. His character, for honesty, 
integrity, and sobriety, has as yet stood unimpeached. A chief by birth, 
he might assert a more prominent station among his people ; but he declines 
it, with the noble resolve : — ** Until by my own achievements I have earned 
that honor, I shall never consent to become a chief; for certainly, then my 
people will listen to me !" 

The hero of the above sketch is now on his way to visit his friends in 
St. Louis for the second time, and is at present my only travelling com- 
panion. As such I And him agreeable and interesting. I am indebted to 
nim for much valuable information relative to the habits and peculiarities 
of his own and various other Indian tribes, while his vast fund of ready 
anecdotes and amusing stories serves to beguile the weariness of camp 
hours. 

The religious peculiarities of the mountain tribes furnished us a theme 
for frequent conversation, inasmuch as their sentiments with regard to a 
future existence are strangely interesting in detail. Most of Uiem are 
firm believers in the immortality of the soul, as well as the conditicn of 
Tsmxda and punishments after death — though some accredit the Hindoo 



500 THE WATER BULL. 

Bodotts of metamorphoeis or metempsychosis, while yet a very few look 
fat annihilaticm. • , 

The majority, however, jiver that the ffood, at death, after a long and 
tedious journey, reach a happy country, abundant in everything tiie heart 
can desire, or thought conceive of; where, free from pain and sickness, and 
removed from every ill, they shall bask forever in the sunshine of perfect 
beatitude. 

To aid in this long journey, horses are occasionally sacrificed for the 
feeble and decrepit, (more generally squaws and aged warriors,) that, by 
mounting their aisembodied chargers, the spirits of the deceased may gain a 
apeedy entrance within its confines and taste the joys of their eternal home. 

Of those adhering to di^rent opinions, some believe in the transmission 
of souls from body to body through successive ages ; and others, that they 
become the spirits of either men or animals, according to the virtues or 
demerits of the departed. 

With regard to the final allotment of the wicked, their general theology 
consigns them to an interminable wandering over a desert waste, without 
purpose or rest, or even one moment's respite from their miseries, and sub- 
ject to all the bitter pangs of hanger, thirst, and nakedness ; and tormented 
with the sudden ana intolerable extremities of heat and cold. The Scrip* 
turian here will not fail to recognize an obscure delineation of the world 
of woe, as portrayed in the sacred writings. 

The ideas of some few, on the other hand, transform these condemned 
spirits into wild beasts or reptiles, but more frequently into prairie-dogs, 
that, by penance and suflering tiirough a long succession of years, tl^y 
may atone for previous misde^s. 

Many incidents of adventure related by Friday would doubtless interest 
the general reader, but space precludes their insertion. However. I cannot 
refuse place to the following, as aflbrding to the curious a more special 
matter of speculation. 

** On my return from an expedition against the Utahs," said he, **iii 
crossiniv the mountain chain south of Long's Peak, I went in advance of 
the main party. 

** My course led over one of the highest points of the range, whose 
summii disclosed a level surface of considerable extent. While passing 
leisurely along, the crowing of a mountain fowl, a short distance to the 
right, caught my ear. TThere are fowls in some parts of the mountains 
similar to those raised oy the whites, — ^but they are very wild and shy.) 
Following the sound, I was led to the verge of a small lake, with steep 
banks of rock, and sat down by it, in hopes of discovering the object of 
my curiosity. 

** While htire, my attiention was directed to a strange movement in the 
lake- waters, accompanied by a loud noise and turmoiF; soon after which 
a large creature arose from the middle and swam to the shore, where he 
stood upon a rock in full view. His looks frightened me. In size he 
was equal to the largest buffalo, and much like one of those animals in 
form ; he was black, with a singularly shaped head, and had tusks in- 
■lead of horns, which curved downwSjrd. 

• He looked so terrible I harried away as quick aa possible, and »• 



SEPARATE ROUTE& 361 

lated my adventure on rejoining the party. The old men laughed at my 
expressions of wonder — asserting that they>had before seen such creatures 
in the high mountain-iakes, and called them * vxOer hulls? " 

Resuming our course, we travelled by easy stages for five succeeding 
days, which brought us to Council Grove, a noted place of rendezvous 
for Santa Fe companies. 

The intervening country from Cow creek exhibits an entire change in 
its geological character. The landscape is gently undulating, and fur- 
rowed by frequent watercourses. Timber is becoming more abundant. 
The soil appears humid, and presents an air of general fertility. The 
grasses also differ in their species and assume a lusty growth. 

The sand-hills which had before skirted the Arkansas, as the traveller 
advances, lose their naked deformity amid dense groves of timber, and 
finally disappear in the distance. 

There is throughout a, marked scarcity of game common to the grand 
prairies, and everything denotes an approach to the frontiers of 'civiliza- 
tion. 

Council Grove is a stream of considerable magnitude, tributary to the 
Osage river, and, by the Santa Fe trail, is one hundred and forty-four miles 
west of Independence. Its bottoms are broad, fertile, and weil timbered 
with heavy forests of oak, walnut, maple, and most other varieties of 
wood indigenous to the States. 

The country in its vicinity is highly interesting to the agriculturist, 
and presents a soil remarkable for its fertility, inviting the hand of indus- 
try to a rich reward. 

Here, too, all the varied products of the farmer might find a ready cash 
market, from the numerous mountain and Spanish companies that con- 
stantly pass and repass, and, doubtlessly, at commanding prices. This 
locality, in fact, being situated upon the very verge of the grand prairie, 
afibrds a most eligible point for a settlement, and will doubtless soon ac- 
quire a merited importance as the place of general out-fit and supply for 
the western and southwestern trade. 

Through the agency of Friday I became acquainted with the existence 
of a vegetable found in these parts, which is known as the prairie-potato. 
This attains a size almost equalling our common potato. It is of a rough, 
knotty appearance, somewhat oviform, and when cooked is dry and 
sweet tasted. It is found generally in the banks of watercourses, and 
produces a low ground-vine, not dissimilar to a species of t^at vegetable 
usual to warm climates. 

We were detained here for five or six days, by a continuous rain 
which raised the creek to an extraordinary height,— -overflowing its banks 
9xA completely flooding its extensive bottoms. So sudden was the rise 
that we were compelled to move camp three times in the course of aa 
hour, and were finally driven to an adjoining hill. 

Improving the first interval of fair weather presenting itself, I bade 
ftdieu to my Indian companion and renewed my journey alone, as our 

31 



362 CIVILIZED INDUNS. 

routes led in different directions, his for Independence, Mo., and mine for 
V^n Buren, Ark. Following the course of the creek by its right bank for 
some twenty miles, I then struck over to the Neosho, and, continuing on, 
woe fourth day subsequent I reached the Osage village. 

The country passed in travelling this distance, presented much excellent 
land* The creek valleys were broad and heavily timbered, and the adjoin- 
ing prairies undulating and clothed with luxuriant vegetation. The streams • 
were so swollen I was forced to swim most of them, which rendered my 
progress one continued scene of toilsome and perilous adventure. 

My st^y at the Osage village was prolonc^ed for two days, during which 
time I was kindly entertained by a chief who served as my host. 

The Osages nuujber between four and five thousand souls, and inhabit 
the section of country bordering upon the Neosho river. Their territoiy 
is well timbered, abundantly watered, and remarkably fertile. 

In dress and appearance these Indians assimilate the Pawnees and Caws; 
but their dwellings are neater and more spacious, being constructed of wap 
ter-flags fastened to frame-works of poles, so ingeniously thatched and 
tightly interwoven as to prevent the ingress of either wind or rain. 

This tribe are beginning to make advances in civilization, and devote 
Bome little attention to agriculture. A farmer and blacksmith are furnish- 
ed them by the U. S. Government, while the philanthropic efiS)rts of the 
American Board of Missions are directed to their amelioration with consid- 
erable success. 

On resuming; my coarse, a branch of the Neosho which intercepted it 
proved unfordaole, and its passage was otherwise rendered particularly dan- 
gerous on account of the swiftness of its current However, my landlord, 
on seeing my determination to cross at all hazards, procured two large 
pieces of raw hide, which were firmly sewn together in boat shape and 
neld to their proper position by slender boughs ; these he conveyed to the 
stream, and desired me to put my baggage into them, remarking that 
there was " plenty room " for myself, too. Following his directions, the 
frail bark was soon launched and towed to the opposite shore by a son of 
the old man, who swam across for tliat purpose, while his brother, leading 
my mule after him, plunged into the current, and in a few moments every- 
thing was safely landed. 

To reward this generous act I presented the old chief with a blanket, 
and bade him remember that " Good acts pay a sure tribute to a good 
heart, for they nourish its possessor with happy thoughts ; very often, too, 
they yield a twofold return by the gratitude of the one upon whom such 
acts are bestowed ; and then, again, sometimes the practiser is more than 
blessed by the acceptance of such presents as the grateful one may chance 
to offer. So, let my brother always do good, and 3ie Good Spirit will own 
him as a subject well wortliy of his special blessmg." 

Bidding the friendly natives adieu, I mounted my mule and hurried on- 
ward. My course lea through the territory occupied by a division of the 
Shawnees, uid that settled bv the Quapaws and Cherokees. These tribes 
are partially civilized ; but the Cherokees are &rther advanced in reiuifr* 



CONCLUSION. 



S^rldS'^fc^'^" "^'""i ««» *<"l'»inted with. In fact, they a« 

^'^iteneigCuZ^Lr":*^/*''^"*' P«'P'«' ^^^ their iimS 
guDoiB upon the frontiers of Arkangaa and Missouri. 

tinatiOTXpn/Sn! mi/f ^ *V "^^'^ ^"^ Bnren.my point of des- 
had beei soTnS«t^^'%'T'' ^T^ '^ associations'from which I 
provided I ha^C^^ 5 ^i^ ''«'« I wonld take leave of the reader, 
thas for. If tiieVZZt^°'^ *l ^ '^^P'^ Ws interest and attention 
information, or se?^ t„ ^J,^^ ^"^ ^^^^ ""g"** *" ^ stocJ' of "seful 
which primarilv Sn. Jtil * "*t^. ' >'^"'* •«'"' agreeably, the object 
if cont^wZ it r?m-Tn ^•^^''■P""^ '''^''°**"»«^^eb^n accompUshedV- 

^-^^J co.^'.^E?^/LTnJ^3S^r' *^ ''"^ ' ''^^^ ^ 



'1 



V 



t/ 



HOME USE 

CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT 

MAIN LIBRARY 

This book is due on the last date stamped below. 
1 -month loans may be renewed by calling 642-3405. 
6-month loans may be recharged by bringing books 

to Circulation Desk. 
Renewals and recharges may be made 4 days prior 

to duo date. 

ALL BOOKS ARE SUBJECT TO RECALL 7 DAYS 
AFTER DATE CHECKED OUT. 



MAY 1 



KLU. cm — JUN 1 3 7( 




JAN 16 1990 



CIRCULATION 






^- >^x \^ 



HtCCm M I6 7 " tt 



iJMAPYIKf 



REC.aR.Aud^o'TO 
APR 2 1901 — # 



Oil mm 



KtCClR MAR 14*81 



AUG 0'^. 1989 



M^v/^ 



LD21 — A-40m-5,'74 
(B8191ii) 



fieneral Library 

University of Caiifornia 

Beriwioy 




THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 







U.C. BERKELEY LIBRA 

■lllllllll 



CO 




^^ 








'HE UNIVERSITY' OF CALIFORNIA 



LIBRARY OF THE UNIVERSITY 




U UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 




